Let me give the name of 'vicious abstractionism' to a way of using
concepts which may be thus described: We conceive a concrete situation
by singling out some salient or important feature in it, and classing it
under that; then, instead of adding to its previous characters all the
positive consequences which the new way of conceiving it may bring, we
proceed to use our concept privatively; reducing the originally rich
phenomenon to the naked suggestions of that name abstractly taken,
treating it as a case of 'nothing but' that concept, and acting as if
all the other characters from out of which the concept is abstracted
were expunged. [Footnote: Let not the reader confound the fallacy here
described with legitimately negative inferences such as those drawn in
the mood 'celarent' of the logic-books.] Abstraction, functioning in
this way, becomes a means of arrest far more than a means of advance
in thought. It mutilates things; it creates difficulties and finds
impossibilities; and more than half the trouble that metaphysicians and
logicians give themselves over the paradoxes and dialectic puzzles of
the universe may, I am convinced, be traced to this relatively simple
source. THE VICIOUSLY PRIVATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF ABSTRACT CHARACTERS AND
CLASS NAMES is, I am persuaded, one of the great original sins of the
rationalistic mind.

To proceed immediately to concrete examples, cast a glance at the belief
in 'free will,' demolished with such specious persuasiveness recently
by the skilful hand of Professor Fullerton. [Footnote: Popular Science
Monthly, N. Y., vols. lviii and lix.] When a common man says that his
will is free, what does he mean? He means that there are situations of
bifurcation inside of his life in which two futures seem to him equally
possible, for both have their roots equally planted in his present and
his past. Either, if realized, will grow out of his previous motives,
character and circumstances, and will continue uninterruptedly the
pulsations of his personal life. But sometimes both at once are
incompatible with physical nature, and then it seems to the naive
observer as if he made a choice between them NOW, and that the question
of which future is to be, instead of having been decided at the
foundation of the world, were decided afresh at every passing moment in
I which fact seems livingly to grow, and possibility seems, in turning
itself towards one act, to exclude all others.

He who takes things at their face-value here may indeed be deceived. He
may far too often mistake his private ignorance of what is predetermined
for a real indetermination of what is to be. Yet, however imaginary
it may be, his picture of the situation offers no appearance of breach
between the past and future. A train is the same train, its passengers
are the same passengers, its momentum is the same momentum, no matter
which way the switch which fixes its direction is placed. For the
indeterminist there is at all times enough past for all the different
futures in sight, and more besides, to find their reasons in it, and
whichever future comes will slide out of that past as easily as the
train slides by the switch. The world, in short, is just as CONTINUOUS
WITH ITSELF for the believers in free will as for the rigorous
determinists, only the latter are unable to believe in points of
bifurcation as spots of really indifferent equilibrium or as containing
shunts which there--and there only, NOT BEFORE--direct existing motions
without altering their amount.