Well, take an object and an idea, and assume that the latter is true of
the former--as eternally and absolutely true as you like. Let the object
be as much 'as' the idea thinks it, as it is possible for one thing to
be 'as' another. I now formally ask of Professor Pratt to tell what this
'as'-ness in itself CONSISTS in--for it seems to me that it ought to
consist in something assignable and describable, and not remain a pure
mystery, and I promise that if he can assign any determination of it
whatever which I cannot successfully refer to some specification of what
in this article I have called the empirical fundamentum, I will confess
my stupidity cheerfully, and will agree never to publish a line upon
this subject of truth again.

II

Professor Pratt has returned to the charge in a whole book, [Footnote
1: J. B. Pratt: What is Pragmatism. New York, The Macmillan Company,
1909.--The comments I have printed were written in March, 1909, after
some of the articles printed later in the present volume.] which for
its clearness and good temper deserves to supersede all the rest of
the anti-pragmatistic literature. I wish it might do so; for its author
admits all MY essential contentions, simply distinguishing my account
of truth as 'modified' pragmatism from Schiller's and Dewey's, which he
calls pragmatism of the 'radical' sort. As I myself understand Dewey and
Schiller, our views absolutely agree, in spite of our different modes of
statement; but I have enough trouble of my own in life without having to
defend my friends, so I abandon them provisionally to the tender mercy
of Professor Pratt's interpretations, utterly erroneous tho I deem these
to be. My reply as regards myself can be very short, for I prefer to
consider only essentials, and Dr. Pratt's whole book hardly takes the
matter farther than the article to which I retort in Part I of the
present paper.

He repeats the 'as'-formula, as if it were something that I, along with
other pragmatists, had denied, [Footnote: Op. cit., pp. 77-80.] whereas
I have only asked those who insist so on its importance to do something
more than merely utter it--to explicate it, for example, and tell us
what its so great importance consists in. I myself agree most cordially
that for an idea to be true the object must be 'as' the idea declares
it, but I explicate the 'as'-ness as meaning the idea's verifiability.

Now since Dr. Pratt denies none of these verifying 'workings' for which
I have pleaded, but only insists on their inability to serve as the
fundamentum of the truth-relation, it seems that there is really nothing
in the line of FACT about which we differ, and that the issue between us
is solely as to how far the notion of workableness or verifiability
is an essential part of the notion of 'trueness'--'trueness' being Dr.
Pratt's present name for the character of as-ness in the true idea.
I maintain that there is no meaning left in this notion of as-ness or
trueness if no reference to the possibility of concrete working on the
part of the idea is made.