Such abstract talk about cognition's results is surely convenient; and
it is surely as legitimate as it is convenient, SO LONG AS WE DO NOT
FORGET OR POSITIVELY DENY, WHAT IT IGNORES. We may on occasion say
that our idea meant ALWAYS that particular object, that it led us there
because it was OF it intrinsically and essentially. We may insist that
its verification follows upon that original cognitive virtue in it--and
all the rest--and we shall do no harm so long as we know that these are
only short cuts in our thinking. They are positively true accounts of
fact AS FAR AS THEY GO, only they leave vast tracts of fact out of the
account, tracts of tact that have to be reinstated to make the accounts
literally true of any real case. But if, not merely passively ignoring
the intermediaries, you actively deny them [Footnote: This is the
fallacy which I have called 'vicious intellectualism' in my book A
Pluralistic Universe, Longmans, Green & Co., 1909.] to be even potential
requisites for the results you are so struck by, your epistemology goes
to irremediable smash. You are as far off the track as an historian
would be, if, lost in admiration of Napoleon's personal power, he were
to ignore his marshals and his armies, and were to accuse you of
error in describing his conquests as effected by their means. Of such
abstractness and one-sidedness I accuse most of the critics of my own
account.

In the second lecture of the book Pragmatism, I used the illustration
of a squirrel scrambling round a tree-trunk to keep out of sight of
a pursuing man: both go round the tree, but does the man go round the
squirrel? It all depends, I said, on what you mean by going round.' In
one sense of the word the man 'goes round,' in another sense he does
not. I settled the dispute by pragmatically distinguishing the senses.
But I told how some disputants had called my distinction a shuffling
evasion and taken their stand on what they called 'plain honest English
going-round.'

In such a simple case few people would object to letting the term in
dispute be translated into its concreter equivalents. But in the case
of a complex function like our knowing they act differently. I give full
concrete particular value for the ideas of knowing in every case I can
think of, yet my critics insist that 'plain honest English knowing' is
left out of my account. They write as if the minus were on my side and
the plus on theirs.

The essence of the matter for me is that altho knowing can be both
abstractly and concretely described, and altho the abstract descriptions
are often useful enough, yet they are all sucked up and absorbed without
residuum into the concreter ones, and contain nothing of any essentially
other or higher nature, which the concrete descriptions can be justly
accused of leaving behind. Knowing is just a natural process like any
other. There is no ambulatory process whatsoever, the results of which
we may not describe, if we prefer to, in saltatory terms, or represent
in static formulation. Suppose, e.g., that we say a man is 'prudent.'
Concretely, that means that he takes out insurance, hedges in betting,
looks before he leaps. Do such acts CONSTITUTE the prudence? ARE they
the man qua prudent?