Anti-Prag.:--What absurd questions! Isn't it enough to say that it is
true that the facts are so-and-so, and false that they are otherwise?

Prag.:--'It' is true that the facts are so-and-so--I won't yield to the
temptation of asking you what is true; but I do ask you whether your
phrase that 'it is true that' the facts are so-and-so really means
anything really additional to the bare being so-and-so of the facts
themselves.

Anti-Prag.:--It seems to mean more than the bare being of the facts. It
is a sort of mental equivalent for them, their epistemological function,
their value in noetic terms. Prag.:--A sort of spiritual double or ghost
of them, apparently! If so, may I ask you where this truth is found.

Anti-Prag.:--Where? where? There is no 'where'--it simply obtains,
absolutely obtains.

Prag.:--Not in any one's mind?

Anti-Prag.:--No, for we agreed that no actual knower of the truth should
be assumed.

Prag.:--No actual knower, I agree. But are you sure that no notion of a
potential or ideal knower has anything to do with forming this strangely
elusive idea of the truth of the facts in your mind?

Anti-Prag.:--Of course if there be a truth concerning the facts, that
truth is what the ideal knower would know. To that extent you can't keep
the notion of it and the notion of him separate. But it is not him first
and then it; it is it first and then him, in my opinion.

Prag.:--But you still leave me terribly puzzled as to the status of this
so-called truth, hanging as it does between earth and heaven, between
reality and knowledge, grounded in the reality, yet numerically
additional to it, and at the same time antecedent to any knower's
opinion and entirely independent thereof. Is it as independent of the
knower as you suppose? It looks to me terribly dubious, as if it might
be only another name for a potential as distinguished from an actual
knowledge of the reality. Isn't your truth, after all, simply what
any successful knower would have to know in case he existed? And in a
universe where no knowers were even conceivable would any truth about
the facts there as something numerically distinguishable from the facts
themselves, find a place to exist in? To me such truth would not only be
non-existent, it would be unimaginable, inconceivable.

Anti-Prag.:--But I thought you said a while ago that there is a truth of
past events, even tho no one shall ever know it.

Prag.:--Yes, but you must remember that I also stipulated for permission
to define the word in my own fashion. The truth of an event, past,
present, or future, is for me only another name for the fact that if
the event ever does get known, the nature of the knowledge is already to
some degree predetermined. The truth which precedes actual knowledge of
a fact means only what any possible knower of the fact will eventually
find himself necessitated to believe about it. He must believe something
that will bring him into satisfactory relations with it, that will prove
a decent mental substitute for it. What this something may be is of
course partly fixed already by the nature of the fact and by the sphere
of its associations. This seems to me all that you can clearly mean when
you say that truth pre-exists to knowledge. It is knowledge anticipated,
knowledge in the form of possibility merely.