Dr. Pratt perplexes me again by seeming to charge Dewey and Schiller
[Footnote: Page 200] (I am not sure that he charges me) with an account
of truth which would allow the object believed in not to exist, even
if the belief in it were true. 'Since the truth of an idea,' he writes,
'means merely the fact that the idea works, that fact is all that you
mean when you say the idea is true' (p. 206). 'WHEN YOU SAY THE IDEA IS
TRUE'--does that mean true for YOU, the critic, or true for the believer
whom you are describing? The critic's trouble over this seems to come
from his taking the word 'true' irrelatively, whereas the pragmatist
always means 'true for him who experiences the workings.' 'But is the
object REALLY true or not?'--the critic then seems to ask,--as if
the pragmatist were bound to throw in a whole ontology on top of his
epistemology and tell us what realities indubitably exist. 'One world at
a time,' would seem to be the right reply here.

One other trouble of Dr. Pratt's must be noticed. It concerns the
'transcendence' of the object. When our ideas have worked so as to bring
us flat up against the object, NEXT to it, 'is our relation to it then
ambulatory or saltatory?' Dr. Pratt asks. If YOUR headache be my object,
'MY experiences break off where yours begin,' Dr. Pratt writes,
and 'this fact is of great importance, for it bars out the sense of
transition and fulfilment which forms so important an element in the
pragmatist description of knowledge--the sense of fulfilment due to a
continuous passage from the original idea to the known object. If this
comes at all when I know your headache, it comes not with the object,
but quite on my side of the "epistemological gulf." The gulf is still
there to be transcended.' (p. 158).

Some day of course, or even now somewhere in the larger life of
the universe, different men's headaches may become confluent or be
'co-conscious.' Here and now, however, headaches do transcend each other
and, when not felt, can be known only conceptually. My idea is that
you really have a headache; it works well with what I see of your
expression, and with what I hear you say; but it doesn't put me in
possession of the headache itself. I am still at one remove, and the
headache 'transcends' me, even tho it be in nowise transcendent of human
experience generally. Bit the 'gulf' here is that which the pragmatist
epistemology itself fixes in the very first words it uses, by
saying there must be an object and an idea. The idea however doesn't
immediately leap the gulf, it only works from next to next so as to
bridge it, fully or approximately. If it bridges it, in the pragmatist's
vision of his hypothetical universe, it can be called a 'true' idea.
If it only MIGHT bridge it, but doesn't, or if it throws a bridge
distinctly AT it, it still has, in the onlooking pragmatist's eyes, what
Professor Pratt calls 'trueness.' But to ask the pragmatist thereupon
whether, when it thus fails to coalesce bodily with the object, it is
REALLY true or has REAL trueness,--in other words whether the headache
he supposes, and supposes the thinker he supposes, to believe in, be
a real headache or not,--is to step from his hypothetical universe of
discourse into the altogether different world of natural fact.

VIII