This account of truth, following upon the similar ones given by Messrs.
Dewey and Schiller, has occasioned the liveliest discussion. Few critics
have defended it, most of them have scouted it. It seems evident that
the subject is a hard one to understand, under its apparent simplicity;
and evident also, I think, that the definitive settlement of it will
mark a turning-point in the history of epistemology, and consequently
in that of general philosophy. In order to make my own thought more
accessible to those who hereafter may have to study the question, I have
collected in the volume that follows all the work of my pen that bears
directly on the truth-question. My first statement was in 1884, in the
article that begins the present volume. The other papers follow in the
order of their publication. Two or three appear now for the first time.

One of the accusations which I oftenest have had to meet is that of
making the truth of our religious beliefs consist in their 'feeling
good' to us, and in nothing else. I regret to have given some excuse for
this charge, by the unguarded language in which, in the book Pragmatism,
I spoke of the truth of the belief of certain philosophers in the
absolute. Explaining why I do not believe in the absolute myself (p.
78), yet finding that it may secure 'moral holidays' to those who need
them, and is true in so far forth (if to gain moral holidays be a
good), [Footnote: Op. cit., p. 75.] I offered this as a conciliatory
olive-branch to my enemies. But they, as is only too common with such
offerings, trampled the gift under foot and turned and rent the giver. I
had counted too much on their good will--oh for the rarity of
Christian charity under the sun! Oh for the rarity of ordinary secular
intelligence also! I had supposed it to be matter of common observation
that, of two competing views of the universe which in all other respects
are equal, but of which the first denies some vital human need while
the second satisfies it, the second will be favored by sane men for the
simple reason that it makes the world seem more rational. To choose the
first view under such circumstances would be an ascetic act, an act of
philosophic self-denial of which no normal human being would be guilty.
Using the pragmatic test of the meaning of concepts, I had shown the
concept of the absolute to MEAN nothing but the holiday giver, the
banisher of cosmic fear. One's objective deliverance, when one says
'the absolute exists,' amounted, on my showing, just to this, that 'some
justification of a feeling of security in presence of the universe,'
exists, and that systematically to refuse to cultivate a feeling of
security would be to do violence to a tendency in one's emotional life
which might well be respected as prophetic.

Apparently my absolutist critics fail to see the workings of their own
minds in any such picture, so all that I can do is to apologize, and
take my offering back. The absolute is true in NO way then, and least of
all, by the verdict of the critics, in the way which I assigned!