It almost reconciles one to being no logician that one thereby escapes
so much abstractionism. Abstractionism of the worst sort dogs Mr.
Russell in his own trials to tell positively what the word 'truth'
means. In the third of his articles on Meinong, in Mind, vol. xiii, p.
509 (1904), he attempts this feat by limiting the discussion to three
terms only, a proposition, its content, and an object, abstracting from
the whole context of associated realities in which such terms are found
in every case of actual knowing. He puts the terms, thus taken in a
vacuum, and made into bare logical entities, through every possible
permutation and combination, tortures them on the rack until nothing is
left of them, and after all this logical gymnastic, comes out with the
following portentous conclusion as what he believes to be the correct
view: that there is no problem at all in truth and falsehood, that some
propositions are true and some false, just as some roses are red and
some white, that belief is a certain attitude towards propositions,
which is called knowledge when they are true, error when they are
false'--and he seems to think that when once this insight is reached the
question may be considered closed forever!

In spite of my admiration of Mr. Russell's analytic powers, I wish,
after reading such an article, that pragmatism, even had it no other
function, might result in making him and other similarly gifted men
ashamed of having used such powers in such abstraction from reality.
Pragmatism saves us at any rate from such diseased abstractionism as
those pages show.

P. S. Since the foregoing rejoinder was written an article on Pragmatism
which I believe to be by Mr. Russell has appeared in the Edinburgh
Review for April, 1909. As far as his discussion of the truth-problem
goes, altho he has evidently taken great pains to be fair, it seems
to me that he has in no essential respect improved upon his former
arguments. I will therefore add nothing further, but simply refer
readers who may be curious to pp. 272-280 of the said article.

XV

A DIALOGUE

After correcting the proofs of all that precedes I imagine a residual
state of mind on the part of my reader which may still keep him
unconvinced, and which it may be my duty to try at least to dispel. I
can perhaps be briefer if I put what I have to say in dialogue form. Let
then the anti-pragmatist begin:--

Anti-Pragmatist:--You say that the truth of an idea is constituted by
its workings. Now suppose a certain state of facts, facts for example
of antediluvian planetary history, concerning which the question may be
asked:

'Shall the truth about them ever be known?' And suppose (leaving the
hypothesis of an omniscient absolute out of the account) that we assume
that the truth is never to be known. I ask you now, brother pragmatist,
whether according to you there can be said to be any truth at all about
such a state of facts. Is there a truth, or is there not a truth, in
cases where at any rate it never comes to be known?

Pragmatist:--Why do you ask me such a question?

Anti-Prag.:--Because I think it puts you in a bad dilemma.

Prag.:--How so?