Let us next pass on to the case of immediate or intuitive acquaintance
with an object, and let the object be the white paper before our eyes.
The thought-stuff and the thing-stuff are here indistinguishably the
same in nature, as we saw a moment since, and there is no context of
intermediaries or associates to stand between and separate the thought
and thing. There is no 'presence in absence' here, and no 'pointing,'
but rather an allround embracing of the paper by the thought; and it is
clear that the knowing cannot now be explained exactly as it was when
the tigers were its object. Dotted all through our experience are states
of immediate acquaintance just like this. Somewhere our belief always
does rest on ultimate data like the whiteness, smoothness, or squareness
of this paper. Whether such qualities be truly ultimate aspects of
being, or only provisional suppositions of ours, held-to till we get
better informed, is quite immaterial for our present inquiry. So long as
it is believed in, we see our object face to face. What now do we mean
by 'knowing' such a sort of object as this? For this is also the way
in which we should know the tiger if our conceptual idea of him were to
terminate by having led us to his lair?

This address must not become too long, so I must give my answer in the
fewest words. And let me first say this: So far as the white paper or
other ultimate datum of our experience is considered to enter also into
some one else's experience, and we, in knowing it, are held to know it
there as well as here; so far, again, as it is considered to be a mere
mask for hidden molecules that other now impossible experiences of our
own might some day lay bare to view; so far it is a case of tigers in
India again--the things known being absent experiences, the knowing can
only consist in passing smoothly towards them through the intermediary
context that the world supplies. But if our own private vision of the
paper be considered in abstraction from every other event, as if it
constituted by itself the universe (and it might perfectly well do so,
for aught we can understand to the contrary), then the paper seen and
the seeing of it are only two names for one indivisible fact which,
properly named, is THE DATUM, THE PHENOMENON, OR THE EXPERIENCE. The
paper is in the mind and the mind is around the paper, because paper
and mind are only two names that are given later to the one experience,
when, taken in a larger world of which it forms a part, its connections
are traced in different directions. [Footnote: What is meant by this is
that 'the experience' can be referred to either of two great associative
systems, that of the experiencer's mental history, or that of the
experienced facts of the world. Of both of these systems it forms part,
and may be regarded, indeed, as one of their points of intersection.
One might let a vertical line stand for the mental history; but the
same object, O, appears also in the mental history of different persons,
represented by the other vertical lines. It thus ceases to be the
private property of one experience, and becomes, so to speak, a shared
or public thing. We can track its outer history in this way, and
represent it by the horizontal line. (It is also known representatively
at other points of the vertical lines, or intuitively there again,
so that the line of its outer history would have to be looped and
wandering, but I make it straight for simplicity's sake.)] In any case,
however, it is the same stuff figures in all the sets of lines.