Our judgments at any rate change the character of FUTURE reality by
the acts to which they lead. Where these acts are acts expressive of
trust,--trust, e.g., that a man is honest, that our health is good
enough, or that we can make a successful effort,--which acts may be a
needed antecedent of the trusted things becoming true. Professor Taylor
says [Footnote: In an article criticising Pragmatism (as he conceives
it) in the McGill University Quarterly published at Montreal, for May,
1904.] that our trust is at any rate UNTRUE WHEN IT IS MADE, i. e;
before the action; and I seem to remember that he disposes of anything
like a faith in the general excellence of the universe (making the
faithful person's part in it at any rate more excellent) as a 'lie in
the soul.' But the pathos of this expression should not blind us to
the complication of the facts. I doubt whether Professor Taylor would
himself be in favor of practically handling trusters of these kinds as
liars. Future and present really mix in such emergencies, and one can
always escape lies in them by using hypothetic forms. But Mr. Taylor's
attitude suggests such absurd possibilities of practice that it seems
to me to illustrate beautifully how self-stultifying the conception of
a truth that shall merely register a standing fixture may become.
Theoretic truth, truth of passive copying, sought in the sole interests
of copying as such, not because copying is GOOD FOR SOMETHING, but
because copying ought schlechthin to be, seems, if you look at it
coldly, to be an almost preposterous ideal. Why should the universe,
existing in itself, also exist in copies? How CAN it be copied in the
solidity of its objective fulness? And even if it could, what would the
motive be? 'Even the hairs of your head are numbered.' Doubtless they
are, virtually; but why, as an absolute proposition, OUGHT the number to
become copied and known? Surely knowing is only one way of interacting
with reality and adding to its effect.

The opponent here will ask: 'Has not the knowing of truth any
substantive value on its own account, apart from the collateral
advantages it may bring? And if you allow theoretic satisfactions to
exist at all, do they not crowd the collateral satisfactions out of
house and home, and must not pragmatism go into bankruptcy, if she
admits them at all?' The destructive force of such talk disappears as
soon as we use words concretely instead of abstractly, and ask, in our
quality of good pragmatists, just what the famous theoretic needs are
known as and in what the intellectual satisfactions consist.