I am perplexed by the superior importance which Dr. Pratt attributes
to abstract trueness over concrete verifiability in an idea, and I wish
that he might be moved to explain. It is prior to verification, to be
sure, but so is the verifiability for which I contend prior, just as a
man's 'mortality' (which is nothing but the possibility of his death) is
prior to his death, but it can hardly be that this abstract priority of
all possibility to its correlative fact is what so obstinate a quarrel
is about. I think it probable that Dr. Pratt is vaguely thinking
of something concreter than this. The trueness of an idea must mean
SOMETHING DEFINITE IN IT THAT DETERMINES ITS TENDENCY TO WORK, and
indeed towards this object rather than towards that. Undoubtedly there
is something of this sort in the idea, just as there is something in man
that accounts for his tendency towards death, and in bread that accounts
for its tendency to nourish. What that something is in the case of truth
psychology tells us: the idea has associates peculiar to itself, motor
as well as ideational; it tends by its place and nature to call these
into being, one after another; and the appearance of them in succession
is what we mean by the 'workings' of the idea. According to what they
are, does the trueness or falseness which the idea harbored come to
light. These tendencies have still earlier conditions which, in a
general way, biology, psychology and biography can trace. This whole
chain of natural causal conditions produces a resultant state of things
in which new relations, not simply causal, can now be found, or into
which they can now be introduced,--the relations namely which we
epistemologists study, relations of adaptation, of substitutability, of
instrumentality, of reference and of truth.

The prior causal conditions, altho there could be no knowing of any
kind, true or false, without them, are but preliminary to the question
of what makes the ideas true or false when once their tendencies have
been obeyed. The tendencies must exist in some shape anyhow, but their
fruits are truth, falsity, or irrelevancy, according to what they
concretely turn out to be. They are not 'saltatory' at any rate, for
they evoke their consequences contiguously, from next to next only; and
not until the final result of the whole associative sequence, actual
or potential, is in our mental sight, can we feel sure what its
epistemological significance, if it have any, may be. True knowing is,
in fine, not substantially, in itself, or 'as such,' inside of the idea
from the first, any more than mortality AS SUCH is inside of the man, or
nourishment AS SUCH inside of the bread. Something else is there first,
that practically MAKES FOR knowing, dying or nourishing, as the case may
be. That something is the 'nature' namely of the first term, be it idea,
man, or bread, that operates to start the causal chain of processes
which, when completed, is the complex fact to which we give whatever
functional name best fits the case. Another nature, another chain of
cognitive workings; and then either another object known or the same
object known differently, will ensue.