'For those who do not pray, there remains the resolve that, so far as
their strength may permit, neither the pains of death nor the pains
of life shall drive them to any comfort in that which they hold to be
false, or drive them from any comfort [discomfort?] in that which they
hold to be true.'

How can so ingenious-minded a writer fail to see how far over the heads
of the enemy all his arrows pass? When Mr. McTaggart himself believes
that the universe is run by the dialectic energy of the absolute idea,
his insistent desire to have a world of that sort is felt by him to
be no chance example of desire in general, but an altogether peculiar
insight-giving passion to which, in this if in no other instance, he
would be stupid not to yield. He obeys its concrete singularity, not
the bare abstract feature in it of being a 'desire.' His situation is as
particular as that of an actress who resolves that it is best for her
to marry and leave the stage, of a priest who becomes secular, of a
politician who abandons public life. What sensible man would seek
to refute the concrete decisions of such persons by tracing them
to abstract premises, such as that 'all actresses must marry,' 'all
clergymen must be laymen,' 'all politicians should resign their posts'?
Yet this type of refutation, absolutely unavailing though it be for
purposes of conversion, is spread by Mr. McTaggart through many pages of
his book. For the aboundingness of our real reasons he substitutes
one narrow point. For men's real probabilities he gives a skeletonized
abstraction which no man was ever tempted to believe.

The abstraction in my next example is less simple, but is quite as
flimsy as a weapon of attack. Empiricists think that truth in general is
distilled from single men's beliefs; and the so-called pragmatists 'go
them one better' by trying to define what it consists in when it comes.
It consists, I have elsewhere said, in such a working on the part of the
beliefs as may bring the man into satisfactory relations with objects to
which these latter point. The working is of course a concrete working
in the actual experience of human beings, among their ideas, feelings,
perceptions, beliefs and acts, as well as among the physical things
of their environment, and the relations must be understood as being
possible as well as actual. In the chapter on truth of my book
Pragmatism I have taken pains to defend energetically this view. Strange
indeed have been the misconceptions of it by its enemies, and many have
these latter been. Among the most formidable-sounding onslaughts on the
attempt to introduce some concreteness into our notion of what the truth
of an idea may mean, is one that has been raised in many quarters to the
effect that to make truth grow in any way out of human opinion is but
to reproduce that protagorean doctrine that the individual man is
'the measure of all things,' which Plato in his immortal dialogue, the
Thaeatetus, is unanimously said to have laid away so comfortably in
its grave two thousand years ago. The two cleverest brandishers of this
objection to make truth concrete, Professors Rickert and Munsterberg,
write in German, [Footnote: Munsterberg's book has just appeared in an
English version: The Eternal Values, Boston, 1909.] and 'relativismus'
is the name they give to the heresy which they endeavor to uproot.