But is this not the globe, the elephant and the tortoise over again?
Must not something end by supporting itself? Humanism is willing to let
finite experience be self-supporting. Somewhere being must immediately
breast nonentity. Why may not the advancing front of experience,
carrying its immanent satisfactions and dissatisfactions, cut against
the black inane as the luminous orb of the moon cuts the caerulean
abyss? Why should anywhere the world be absolutely fixed and finished?
And if reality genuinely grows, why may it not grow in these very
determinations which here and now are made?

In point of fact it actually seems to grow by our mental determinations,
be these never so 'true.' Take the 'great bear' or 'dipper'
constellation in the heavens. We call it by that name, we count the
stars and call them seven, we say they were seven before they were
counted, and we say that whether any one had ever noted the fact or not,
the dim resemblance to a long-tailed (or long-necked?) animal was always
truly there. But what do we mean by this projection into past eternity
of recent human ways of thinking? Did an 'absolute' thinker actually
do the counting, tell off the stars upon his standing number-tally, and
make the bear-comparison, silly as the latter is? Were they explicitly
seven, explicitly bear-like, before the human witness came? Surely
nothing in the truth of the attributions drives us to think this.
They were only implicitly or virtually what we call them, and we human
witnesses first explicated them and made them 'real.' A fact virtually
pre-exists when every condition of its realization save one is already
there. In this case the condition lacking is the act of the counting and
comparing mind. But the stars (once the mind considers them) themselves
dictate the result. The counting in no wise modifies their previous
nature, and, they being what and where they are, the count cannot fall
out differently. It could then ALWAYS be made. NEVER could the number
seven be questioned, IF THE QUESTION ONCE WERE RAISED.

We have here a quasi-paradox. Undeniably something comes by the counting
that was not there before. And yet that something was ALWAYS TRUE. In
one sense you create it, and in another sense you FIND it. You have to
treat your count as being true beforehand, the moment you come to treat
the matter at all.

Our stellar attributes must always be called true, then; yet none the
less are they genuine additions made by our intellect to the world of
fact. Not additions of consciousness only, but additions of 'content.'
They copy nothing that pre-existed, yet they agree with what
pre-existed, fit it, amplify it, relate and connect it with a 'wain,'
a number-tally, or what not, and build it out. It seems to me that
humanism is the only theory that builds this case out in the good
direction, and this case stands for innumerable other kinds of case. In
all such eases, odd as it may sound, our judgment may actually be said
to retroact and to enrich the past.