I am, of course, postulating here a standing reality independent of the
idea that knows it. I am also postulating that satisfactions grow pari
passu with our approximation to such reality. [Footnote 1: Say, if
you prefer to, that DISsatisfactions decrease pari passu with
such approximation. The approximation may be of any kind
assignable--approximation in time or in space, or approximation in kind,
which in common speech means 'copying.'] If my critics challenge this
latter assumption, I retort upon them with the former. Our whole notion
of a standing reality grows up in the form of an ideal limit to the
series of successive termini to which our thoughts have led us and
still are leading us. Each terminus proves provisional by leaving us
unsatisfied. The truer idea is the one that pushes farther; so we
are ever beckoned on by the ideal notion of an ultimate completely
satisfactory terminus. I, for one, obey and accept that notion. I can
conceive no other objective CONTENT to the notion of ideally perfect
truth than that of penetration into such a terminus, nor can I conceive
that the notion would ever have grown up, or that true ideas would ever
have been sorted out from false or idle ones, save for the greater
sum of satisfactions, intellectual or practical, which the truer ones
brought with them. Can we imagine a man absolutely satisfied with an
idea and with all its relations to his other ideas and to his sensible
experiences, who should yet not take its content as a true account of
reality? The matter of the true is thus absolutely identical with the
matter of the satisfactory. You may put either word first in your ways
of talking; but leave out that whole notion of SATISFACTORY WORKING or
LEADING (which is the essence of my pragmatistic account) and call truth
a static logical relation, independent even of POSSIBLE leadings or
satisfactions, and it seems to me you cut all ground from under you.

I fear that I am still very obscure. But I respectfully implore those
who reject my doctrine because they can make nothing of my stumbling
language, to tell us in their own name--und zwar very concretely and
articulately!--just how the real, genuine and absolutely 'objective'
truth which they believe in so profoundly, is constituted and
established. They mustn't point to the 'reality' itself, for truth is
only our subjective relation to realities. What is the nominal
essence of this relation, its logical definition, whether or not it be
'objectively' attainable by mortals?

Whatever they may say it is, I have the firmest faith that my account
will prove to have allowed for it and included it by anticipation, as
one possible case in the total mixture of cases. There is, in short,
no ROOM for any grade or sort of truth outside of the framework of
the pragmatic system, outside of that jungle of empirical workings and
leadings, and their nearer or ulterior terminations, of which I seem to
have written so unskilfully.

VII

PROFESSOR PRATT ON TRUTH

I

[Footnote: Reprinted from the Journal of Philosophy, etc., August 15,
1907 (vol. iv, p. 464).]

Professor J. B. Pratt's paper in the Journal of Philosophy for June 6,
1907, is so brilliantly written that its misconception of the pragmatist
position seems doubly to call for a reply.