Or is the prudence something by itself and independent of them? As a
constant habit in him, a permanent tone of character, it is convenient
to call him prudent in abstraction from any one of his acts, prudent in
general and without specification, and to say the acts follow from the
pre-existing prudence. There are peculiarities in his psycho-physical
system that make him act prudently; and there are tendencies to
association in our thoughts that prompt some of them to make for truth
and others for error. But would the man be prudent in the absence of
each and all of the acts? Or would the thoughts be true if they had no
associative or impulsive tendencies? Surely we have no right to oppose
static essences in this way to the moving processes in which they live
embedded.

My bedroom is above my library. Does the 'aboveness' here mean
aught that is different from the concrete spaces which have to be
moved-through in getting from the one to the other? It means, you may
say, a pure topographic relation, a sort of architect's plan among the
eternal essences. But that is not the full aboveness, it is only an
abbreviated substitute that on occasion may lead my mind towards truer,
i.e., fuller, dealings with the real aboveness. It is not an aboveness
ante rem, it is a post rem extract from the aboveness in rebus. We
may indeed talk, for certain conveniences, as if the abstract scheme
preceded, we may say 'I must go up stairs because of the essential
aboveness,' just as we may say that the man 'does prudent acts because
of his ingrained prudence,' or that our ideas 'lead us truly because of
their intrinsic truth.' But this should not debar us on other occasions
from using completer forms of description. A concrete matter of fact
always remains identical under any form of description, as when we say
of a line, now that it runs from left to right, and now that it runs
from right to left. These are but names of one and the same fact, one
more expedient to use at one time, one at another. The full facts of
cognition, whatever be the way in which we talk about them, even when
we talk most abstractly, stand inalterably given in the actualities and
possibilities of the experience-continuum. [Footnote 1: The ultimate
object or terminus of a cognitive process may in certain instances lie
beyond the direct experience of the particular cognizer, but it, of
course, must exist as part of the total universe of experience whose
constitution, with cognition in it, the critic is discussing.] But my
critics treat my own more concrete talk as if IT were the kind that
sinned by its inadequacy, and as if the full continuum left something
out.