It is in this charge that the vicious abstractionism becomes most
apparent. The antipragmatist, in postulating absolute truth, refuses
to give any account of what the words may mean. For him they form a
self-explanatory term. The pragmatist, on the contrary, articulately
defines their meaning. Truth absolute, he says, means an ideal set
of formulations towards which all opinions may in the long run of
experience be expected to converge. In this definition of absolute truth
he not only postulates that there is a tendency to such convergence
of opinions, to such ultimate consensus, but he postulates the other
factors of his definition equally, borrowing them by anticipation from
the true conclusions expected to be reached. He postulates the existence
of opinions, he postulates the experience that will sift them, and the
consistency which that experience will show. He justifies himself in
these assumptions by saying that they are not postulates in the strict
sense but simple inductions from the past extended to the future by
analogy; and he insists that human opinion has already reached a pretty
stable equilibrium regarding them, and that if its future development
fails to alter them, the definition itself, with all its terms included,
will be part of the very absolute truth which it defines. The hypothesis
will, in short, have worked successfully all round the circle and proved
self-corroborative, and the circle will be closed.

The anti-pragmatist, however, immediately falls foul of the word
'opinion' here, abstracts it from the universe of life, and uses it as
a bare dictionary-substantive, to deny the rest of the assumptions which
it coexists withal. The dictionary says that an opinion is 'what some
one thinks or believes.' This definition leaves every one's opinion free
to be autogenous, or unrelated either to what any one else may think or
to what the truth may be.

Therefore, continue our abstractionists, we must conceive it as
essentially thus unrelated, so that even were a billion men to sport the
same opinion, and only one man to differ, we could admit no collateral
circumstances which might presumptively make it more probable that he,
not they, should be wrong. Truth, they say, follows not the counting of
noses, nor is it only another name for a majority vote. It is a relation
that antedates experience, between our opinions and an independent
something which the pragmatist account ignores, a relation which, tho
the opinions of individuals should to all eternity deny it, would still
remain to qualify them as false. To talk of opinions without referring
to this independent something, the anti-pragmatist assures us, is to
play Hamlet with Hamlet's part left out.