Mr. Russell himself is far too witty and athletic a ratiocinator simply
to repeat the slander dogmatically. Being nothing if not mathematical
and logical, he must prove the accusation secundum artem, and convict us
not so much of error as of absurdity. I have sincerely tried to follow
the windings of his mind in this procedure, but for the life of me I
can only see in it another example of what I have called (above, p. 249)
vicious abstractionism. The abstract world of mathematics and pure logic
is so native to Mr. Russell that he thinks that we describers of the
functions of concrete fact must also mean fixed mathematical terms
and functions. A mathematical term, as a, b, c, x, y, sin., log.,
is self-sufficient, and terms of this sort, once equated, can be
substituted for one another in endless series without error. Mr.
Russell, and also Mr. Hawtrey, of whom I shall speak presently, seem to
think that in our mouth also such terms as 'meaning,' 'truth,' 'belief,'
'object,' 'definition,' are self-sufficients with no context of varying
relation that might be further asked about. What a word means is
expressed by its definition, isn't it? The definition claims to be exact
and adequate, doesn't it? Then it can be substituted for the word--since
the two are identical--can't it? Then two words with the same definition
can be substituted for one another, n'est--ce pas? Likewise two
definitions of the same word, nicht wahr, etc., etc., till it will be
indeed strange if you can't convict some one of self-contradiction and
absurdity.

The particular application of this rigoristic treatment to my own little
account of truth as working seems to be something like what follows.
I say 'working' is what the 'truth' of our ideas means, and call it a
definition. But since meanings and things meant, definitions and things
defined, are equivalent and interchangeable, and nothing extraneous to
its definition can be meant when a term is used, it follows that who so
calls an idea true, and means by that word that it works, cannot
mean anything else, can believe nothing but that it does work, and in
particular can neither imply nor allow anything about its object or
deliverance. 'According to the pragmatists,' Mr. Russell writes, 'to say
"it is true that other people exist" means "it is useful to believe
that other people exist." But if so, then these two phrases are merely
different words for the same proposition; therefore when I believe the
one, I believe the other' (p. 400). [Logic, I may say in passing, would
seem to require Mr. Russell to believe them both at once, but he ignores
this consequence, and considers that other people exist' and 'it is
useful to believe that they do EVEN IF THEY DON'T,' must be identical
and therefore substitutable propositions in the pragmatist mouth.]