Mr. Hawtrey's conclusion would seem to be that the pragmatic definition
of the truth of a belief in no way implies--what?--that the believer
shall believe in his own belief's deliverance?--or that the pragmatist
who is talking about him shall believe in that deliverance? The two
cases are quite different. For the believer, Caesar must of course
really exist; for the pragmatist critic he need not, for the pragmatic
deliverance belongs, as I have just said, to another universe of
discourse altogether. When one argues by substituting definition for
definition, one needs to stay in the same universe.

The great shifting of universes in this discussion occurs when we carry
the word 'truth' from the subjective into the objective realm, applying
it sometimes to a property of opinions, sometimes to the facts which the
opinions assert. A number of writers, as Mr. Russell himself, Mr. G.
E. Moore, and others, favor the unlucky word 'proposition,' which seems
expressly invented to foster this confusion, for they speak of truth as
a property of 'propositions.' But in naming propositions it is almost
impossible not to use the word 'that.'

THAT Caesar is dead, THAT virtue is its own reward, are propositions.

I do not say that for certain logical purposes it may not be useful to
treat propositions as absolute entities, with truth or falsehood
inside of them respectively, or to make of a complex like
'that--Caesar--is--dead' a single term and call it a 'truth.' But the
'that' here has the extremely convenient ambiguity for those who wish to
make trouble for us pragmatists, that sometimes it means the FACT that,
and sometimes the BELIEF that, Caesar is no longer living. When I then
call the belief true, I am told that the truth means the fact; when I
claim the fact also, I am told that my definition has excluded the fact,
being a definition only of a certain peculiarity in the belief--so that
in the end I have no truth to talk about left in my possession.

The only remedy for this intolerable ambiguity is, it seems to me, to
stick to terms consistently. 'Reality,' 'idea' or 'belief,' and the
'truth of the idea or belief,' which are the terms I have consistently
held to, seem to be free from all objection.

Whoever takes terms abstracted from all their natural settings,
identifies them with definitions, and treats the latter more algebraico,
not only risks mixing universes, but risks fallacies which the man in
the street easily detects. To prove 'by definition' that the statement
'Caesar exists' is identical with a statement about 'expediency' because
the one statement is 'true' and the other is about 'true statements,'
is like proving that an omnibus is a boat because both are vehicles. A
horse may be defined as a beast that walks on the nails of his middle
digits. Whenever we see a horse we see such a beast, just as whenever
we believe a 'truth' we believe something expedient. Messrs. Russell and
Hawtrey, if they followed their antipragmatist logic, would have to say
here that we see THAT IT IS such a beast, a fact which notoriously no
one sees who is not a comparative anatomist.