THE MEANING OF TRUTH

A SEQUEL TO 'PRAGMATISM'

By William James

PREFACE

THE pivotal part of my book named Pragmatism is its account of the
relation called 'truth' which may obtain between an idea (opinion,
belief, statement, or what not) and its object. 'Truth,' I there say,
'is a property of certain of our ideas. It means their agreement,
as falsity means their disagreement, with reality. Pragmatists and
intellectualists both accept this definition as a matter of course.

'Where our ideas [do] not copy definitely their object, what does
agreement with that object mean? ... Pragmatism asks its usual question.
"Grant an idea or belief to be true," it says, "what concrete difference
will its being true make in any one's actual life? What experiences
[may] be different from those which would obtain if the belief were
false? How will the truth be realized? What, in short, is the truth's
cash-value in experiential terms?" The moment pragmatism asks this
question, it sees the answer: TRUE IDEAS ARE THOSE THAT WE CAN
ASSIMILATE, VALIDATE, CORROBORATE, AND VERIFY. FALSE IDEAS ARE THOSE
THAT WE CANNOT. That is the practical difference it makes to us to have
true ideas; that therefore is the meaning of truth, for it is all that
truth is known as.

'The truth of an idea is not a stagnant property inherent in it. Truth
HAPPENS to an idea. It BECOMES true, is MADE true by events. Its verity
IS in fact an event, a process, the process namely of its verifying
itself, its veriFICATION. Its validity is the process of its validATION.
[Footnote: But 'VERIFIABILITY,' I add, 'is as good as verification.
For one truth-process completed, there are a million in our lives
that function in [the] state of nascency. They lead us towards direct
verification; lead us into the surroundings of the object they envisage;
and then, if everything, runs on harmoniously, we are so sure that
verification is possible that we omit it, and are usually justified by
all that happens.']

'To agree in the widest sense with a reality can only mean to be guided
either straight up to it or into its surroundings, or to be put into
such working touch with it as to handle either it or something connected
with it better than if we disagreed. Better either intellectually or
practically .... Any idea that helps us to deal, whether practically or
intellectually, with either the reality or its belongings, that doesn't
entangle our progress in frustrations, that FITS, in fact, and adapts
our life to the reality's whole setting, will agree sufficiently to meet
the requirement. It will be true of that reality.

'THE TRUE, to put it very briefly, IS ONLY THE EXPEDIENT IN THE WAY OF
OUR THINKING, JUST AS THE RIGHT IS ONLY THE EXPEDIENT IN THE WAY OF OUR
BEHAVING. Expedient in almost any fashion, and expedient in the long
run and on the whole, of course; for what meets expediently all the
experience in sight won't necessarily meet all farther experiences
equally satisfactorily. Experience, as we know, has ways of BOILING
OVER, and making us correct our present formulas.'