For the pragmatist, on the contrary,--all discarnate truth is static,
impotent, and relatively spectral, full truth being the truth that
energizes and does battle. Can any one suppose that the sleeping quality
of truth would ever have been abstracted or have received a name, if
truths had remained forever in that storage-vault of essential timeless
'agreements' and had never been embodied in any panting struggle of
men's live ideas for verification? Surely no more than the abstract
property of 'fitting' would have received a name, if in our world
there had been no backs or feet or gaps in walls to be actually fitted.
EXISTENTIAL truth is incidental to the actual competition of opinions.
ESSENTIAL truth, the truth of the intellectualists, the truth with no
one thinking it, is like the coat that fits tho no one has ever tried
it on, like the music that no ear has listened to. It is less real, not
more real, than the verified article; and to attribute a superior
degree of glory to it seems little more than a piece of perverse
abstraction-worship. As well might a pencil insist that the outline
is the essential thing in all pictorial representation, and chide
the paint-brush and the camera for omitting it, forgetting that THEIR
pictures not only contain the whole outline, but a hundred other things
in addition. Pragmatist truth contains the whole of intellectualist
truth and a hundred other things in addition. Intellectualist truth is
then only pragmatist truth in posse. That on innumerable occasions men
do substitute truth in posse or verifiability, for verification or truth
in act, is a fact to which no one attributes more importance than the
pragmatist: he emphasizes the practical utility of such a habit. But
he does not on that account consider truth in posse,--truth not alive
enough ever to have been asserted or questioned or contradicted, to be
the metaphysically prior thing, to which truths in act are tributary and
subsidiary. When intellectualists do this, pragmatism charges them with
inverting the real relation. Truth in posse MEANS only truths in act;
and he insists that these latter take precedence in the order of logic
as well as in that of being.

SEVENTH MINUNDERSTANDING: PRAGMATISM IGNORES THE THEORETICAL INTEREST.