A favorite way of opposing the more abstract to the more concrete
account is to accuse those who favor the latter of 'confounding
psychology with logic.' Our critics say that when we are asked what
truth MEANS, we reply by telling only how it is ARRIVED-AT. But since a
meaning is a logical relation, static, independent of time, how can it
possibly be identified, they say, with any concrete man's experience,
perishing as this does at the instant of its production? This, indeed,
sounds profound, but I challenge the profundity. I defy any one to show
any difference between logic and psychology here. The logical relation
stands to the psychological relation between idea and object only as
saltatory abstractness stands to ambulatory concreteness. Both relations
need a psychological vehicle; and the 'logical' one is simply the
'psychological' one disemboweled of its fulness, and reduced to a bare
abstractional scheme.

A while ago a prisoner, on being released, tried to assassinate the
judge who had sentenced him. He had apparently succeeded in conceiving
the judge timelessly, had reduced him to a bare logical meaning, that
of being his 'enemy and persecutor,' by stripping off all the concrete
conditions (as jury's verdict, official obligation, absence of personal
spite, possibly sympathy) that gave its full psychological character to
the sentence as a particular man's act in time. Truly the sentence WAS
inimical to the culprit; but which idea of it is the truer one, that
bare logical definition of it, or its full psychological specification?
The anti-pragmatists ought in consistency to stand up for the criminal's
view of the case, treat the judge as the latter's logical enemy, and bar
out the other conditions as so much inessential psychological stuff.

II

A still further obstacle, I suspect, stands in the way of my account's
acceptance. Like Dewey and like Schiller, I have had to say that
the truth of an idea is determined by its satisfactoriness. But
satisfactoriness is a subjective term, just as idea is; and truth
is generally regarded as 'objective.' Readers who admit that
satisfactoriness is our only MARK of truth, the only sign that we
possess the precious article, will still say that the objective relation
between idea and object which the word 'truth' points to is left out of
my account altogether. I fear also that the association of my poor name
with the 'will to believe' (which 'will,' it seems to me, ought to play
no part in this discussion) works against my credit in some quarters.
I fornicate with that unclean thing, my adversaries may think, whereas
your genuine truth-lover must discourse in huxleyan heroics, and feel as
if truth, to be real truth, ought to bring eventual messages of death to
all our satisfactions. Such divergences certainly prove the complexity
of the area of our discussion; but to my mind they also are based on
misunderstandings, which (tho with but little hope of success) I will
try to diminish by a further word of explanation.

First, then, I will ask my objectors to define exactly what SORT of
thing it is they have in mind when they speak of a truth that shall be
absolute, complete and objective; and then I will defy them to show me
any conceivable standing-room for such a kind of truth outside the terms
of my own description. It will fall, as I contend, entirely within the
field of my analysis.