Yet I feel so sure that the fault must lie in my lame forms of statement
and not in my doctrine, that I am fain to try once more to express
myself.

Are there not some general distinctions which it may help us to agree
about in advance? Professor Strong distinguishes between what he calls
'saltatory' and what he calls 'ambulatory' relations. 'Difference,' for
example, is saltatory, jumping as it were immediately from one term
to another, but 'distance' in time or space is made out of intervening
parts of experience through which we ambulate in succession. Years ago,
when T. H. Green's ideas were most influential, I was much troubled
by his criticisms of english sensationalism. One of his disciples in
particular would always say to me, 'Yes! TERMS may indeed be possibly
sensational in origin; but RELATIONS, what are they but pure acts of
the intellect coming upon the sensations from above, and of a higher
nature?' I well remember the sudden relief it gave me to perceive one
day that SPACE-relations at any rate were homogeneous with the terms
between which they mediated. The terms were spaces, and the relations
were other intervening spaces. [Footnote: See my Principles of
Psychology, vol. ii, pp. 148-153.] For the Greenites space-relations had
been saltatory, for me they became thenceforward ambulatory.

Now the most general way of contrasting my view of knowledge with the
popular view (which is also the view of most epistemologists) is to call
my view ambulatory, and the other view saltatory; and the most general
way of characterizing the two views is by saying that my view describes
knowing as it exists concretely, while the other view only describes its
results abstractly taken.

I fear that most of my recalcitrant readers fail to recognize that what
is ambulatory in the concrete may be taken so abstractly as to appear
saltatory. Distance, for example, is made abstract by emptying out
whatever is particular in the concrete intervals--it is reduced thus
to a sole 'difference,' a difference of 'place,' which is a logical or
saltatory distinction, a so-called 'pure relation.'

The same is true of the relation called 'knowing,' which may connect
an idea with a reality. My own account of this relation is ambulatory
through and through. I say that we know an object by means of an idea,
whenever we ambulate towards the object under the impulse which the idea
communicates. If we believe in so-called 'sensible' realities, the idea
may not only send us towards its object, but may put the latter into our
very hand, make it our immediate sensation. But, if, as most reflective
people opine, sensible realities are not 'real' realities, but only
their appearances, our idea brings us at least so far, puts us in touch
with reality's most authentic appearances and substitutes. In any case
our idea brings us into the object's neighborhood, practical or ideal,
gets us into commerce with it, helps us towards its closer acquaintance,
enables us to foresee it, class it, compare it, deduce it,--in short, to
deal with it as we could not were the idea not in our possession.