It is easy to see from what special type of knowing the copy-theory
arose. In our dealings with natural phenomena the great point is to be
able to foretell. Foretelling, according to such a writer as Spencer, is
the whole meaning of intelligence. When Spencer's 'law of intelligence'
says that inner and outer relations must 'correspond,' it means that the
distribution of terms in our inner time-scheme and space-scheme must
be an exact copy of the distribution in real time and space of the real
terms. In strict theory the mental terms themselves need not answer to
the real terms in the sense of severally copying them, symbolic mental
terms being enough, if only the real dates and places be copied. But
in our ordinary life the mental terms are images and the real ones are
sensations, and the images so often copy the sensations, that we
easily take copying of terms as well as of relations to be the natural
significance of knowing. Meanwhile much, even of this common descriptive
truth, is couched in verbal symbols. If our symbols FIT the world, in
the sense of determining our expectations rightly, they may even be the
better for not copying its terms.

It seems obvious that the pragmatic account of all this routine of
phenomenal knowledge is accurate. Truth here is a relation, not of our
ideas to non-human realities, but of conceptual parts of our experience
to sensational parts. Those thoughts are true which guide us to
BENEFICIAL INTERACTION with sensible particulars as they occur, whether
they copy these in advance or not.

From the frequency of copying in the knowledge of phenomenal fact,
copying has been supposed to be the essence of truth in matters rational
also. Geometry and logic, it has been supposed, must copy archetypal
thoughts in the Creator. But in these abstract spheres there is no need
of assuming archetypes. The mind is free to carve so many figures out of
space, to make so many numerical collections, to frame so many classes
and series, and it can analyze and compare so endlessly, that the very
superabundance of the resulting ideas makes us doubt the 'objective'
pre-existence of their models. It would be plainly wrong to suppose a
God whose thought consecrated rectangular but not polar co-ordinates, or
Jevons's notation but not Boole's. Yet if, on the other hand, we assume
God to have thought in advance of every POSSIBLE flight of human fancy
in these directions, his mind becomes too much like a Hindoo idol
with three heads, eight arms and six breasts, too much made up of
superfoetation and redundancy for us to wish to copy it, and the whole
notion of copying tends to evaporate from these sciences. Their objects
can be better interpreted as being created step by step by men, as fast
as they successively conceive them.