The one condition of understanding humanism is to become
inductive-minded oneself, to drop rigorous definitions, and follow lines
of least, resistance 'on the whole.' 'In other words,' an opponent might
say, 'resolve your intellect into a kind of slush.' 'Even so,' I make
reply,--'if you will consent to use no politer word.' For humanism,
conceiving the more 'true' as the more 'satisfactory' (Dewey's term),
has sincerely to renounce rectilinear arguments and ancient ideals
of rigor and finality. It is in just this temper of renunciation, so
different from that of pyrrhonistic scepticism, that the spirit of
humanism essentially consists. Satisfactoriness has to be measured by
a multitude of standards, of which some, for aught we know, may fail in
any given case; and what is more satisfactory than any alternative in
sight, may to the end be a sum of PLUSES and MINUSES, concerning which
we can only trust that by ulterior corrections and improvements
a maximum of the one and a minimum of the other may some day be
approached. It means a real change of heart, a break with absolutistic
hopes, when one takes up this inductive view of the conditions of
belief.

As I understand the pragmatist way of seeing things, it owes its being
to the break-down which the last fifty years have brought about in the
older notions of scientific truth. 'God geometrizes,' it used to be
said; and it was believed that Euclid's elements literally reproduced
his geometrizing. There is an eternal and unchangeable 'reason'; and its
voice was supposed to reverberate in Barbara and Celarent. So also
of the 'laws of nature,' physical and chemical, so of natural history
classifications--all were supposed to be exact and exclusive duplicates
of pre-human archetypes buried in the structure of things, to which the
spark of divinity hidden in our intellect enables us to penetrate. The
anatomy of the world is logical, and its logic is that of a university
professor, it was thought. Up to about 1850 almost every one believed
that sciences expressed truths that were exact copies of a definite
code of non-human realities. But the enormously rapid multiplication of
theories in these latter days has well-nigh upset the notion of any one
of them being a more literally objective kind of thing than another.
There are so many geometries, so many logics, so many physical and
chemical hypotheses, so many classifications, each one of them good for
so much and yet not good for everything, that the notion that even the
truest formula may be a human device and not a literal transcript
has dawned upon us. We hear scientific laws now treated as so much
'conceptual shorthand,' true so far as they are useful but no farther.
Our mind has become tolerant of symbol instead of reproduction, of
approximation instead of exactness, of plasticity instead of rigor.
'Energetics,' measuring the bare face of sensible phenomena so as to
describe in a single formula all their changes of 'level,' is the last
word of this scientific humanism, which indeed leaves queries enough
outstanding as to the reason for so curious a congruence between the
world and the mind, but which at any rate makes our whole notion of
scientific truth more flexible and genial than it used to be.