All the SANCTIONS of a law of truth lie in the very texture of
experience. Absolute or no absolute, the concrete truth FOR US will
always be that way of thinking in which our various experiences most
profitably combine.

And yet, the opponent obstinately urges, your humanist will always
have a greater liberty to play fast and loose with truth than will your
believer in an independent realm of reality that makes the standard
rigid. If by this latter believer he means a man who pretends to know
the standard and who fulminates it, the humanist will doubtless prove
more flexible; but no more flexible than the absolutist himself if the
latter follows (as fortunately our present-day absolutists do follow)
empirical methods of inquiry in concrete affairs. To consider hypotheses
is surely always better than to DOGMATISE ins blaue hinein.

Nevertheless this probable flexibility of temper in him has been used
to convict the humanist of sin. Believing as he does, that truth lies in
rebus, and is at every moment our own line of most propitious reaction,
he stands forever debarred, as I have heard a learned colleague say,
from trying to convert opponents, for does not their view, being THEIR
most propitious momentary reaction, already fill the bill? Only the
believer in the ante-rem brand of truth can on this theory seek to
make converts without self-stultification. But can there be
self-stultification in urging any account whatever of truth? Can
the definition ever contradict the deed? 'Truth is what I feel like
saying'--suppose that to be the definition. 'Well, I feel like saying
that, and I want you to feel like saying it, and shall continue to say
it until I get you to agree.' Where is there any contradiction? Whatever
truth may be said to be, that is the kind of truth which the saying
can be held to carry. The TEMPER which a saying may comport is an
extra-logical matter. It may indeed be hotter in some individual
absolutist than in a humanist, but it need not be so in another. And the
humanist, for his part, is perfectly consistent in compassing sea and
land to make one proselyte, if his nature be enthusiastic enough.

'But how can you be enthusiastic over any view of things which you
know to have been partly made by yourself, and which is liable to alter
during the next minute? How is any heroic devotion to the ideal of truth
possible under such paltry conditions?'