Mr. Russell next joins the army of those who inform their readers that
according to the pragmatist definition of the word 'truth' the belief
that A exists may be 'true' even when A does not exist. This is the
usual slander repeated to satiety by our critics. They forget that in
any concrete account of what is denoted by 'truth' in human life, the
word can only be used relatively to some particular trower. Thus, I may
hold it true that Shakespeare wrote the plays that bear his name, and
may express my opinion to a critic. If the critic be both a pragmatist
and a baconian, he will in his capacity of pragmatist see plain that the
workings of my opinion, I being who I am, make it perfectly true for
me, while in his capacity of baconian he still believes that Shakespeare
never wrote the plays in question. But most anti-pragmatist critics
take the wont 'truth' as something absolute, and easily play on their
reader's readiness to treat his OWE truths as the absolute ones. If
the reader whom they address believes that A does not exist, while we
pragmatists show that those for whom tho belief that it exists works
satisfactorily will always call it true, he easily sneers at the naivete
of our contention, for is not then the belief in question 'true,' tho
what it declares as fact has, as the reader so well knows, no existence?
Mr. Russell speaks of our statement as an 'attempt to get rid of fact'
and naturally enough considers it 'a failure' (p. 410). 'The old notion
of truth reappears,' he adds--that notion being, of course, that when a
belief is true, its object does exist.

It is, of course, BOUND to exist, on sound pragmatic principles.
Concepts signify consequences. How is the world made different for me
by my conceiving an opinion of mine under the concept 'true'? First, an
object must be findable there (or sure signs of such an object must be
found) which shall agree with the opinion. Second, such an opinion must
not be contradicted by anything else I am aware of. But in spite of
the obvious pragmatist requirement that when I have said truly that
something exists, it SHALL exist, the slander which Mr. Russell repeats
has gained the widest currency.