Anti-Prag.:--Why, because if on the one hand you elect to say that
there is a truth, you thereby surrender your whole pragmatist theory.
According to that theory, truth requires ideas and workings to
constitute it; but in the present instance there is supposed to be no
knower, and consequently neither ideas nor workings can exist. What then
remains for you to make your truth of?

Prag.:--Do you wish, like so many of my enemies, to force me to make the
truth out of the reality itself? I cannot: the truth is something
known, thought or said about the reality, and consequently numerically
additional to it. But probably your intent is something different; so
before I say which horn of your dilemma I choose, I ask you to let me
hear what the other horn may be.

Anti-Prag.:--The other horn is this, that if you elect to say that there
is no truth under the conditions assumed, because there are no ideas or
workings, then you fly in the face of common sense. Doesn't common sense
believe that every state of facts must in the nature of things be truly
statable in some kind of a proposition, even tho in point of fact the
proposition should never be propounded by a living soul?

Prag.:--Unquestionably common sense believes this, and so do I. There
have been innumerable events in the history of our planet of which
nobody ever has been or ever will be able to give an account, yet of
which it can already be said abstractly that only one sort of possible
account can ever be true. The truth about any such event is thus already
generically predetermined by the event's nature; and one may accordingly
say with a perfectly good conscience that it virtually pre-exists.
Common sense is thus right in its instinctive contention.

Anti-Prag.:--Is this then the horn of the dilemma which you stand for?
Do you say that there is a truth even in cases where it shall never be
known?

Prag.:--Indeed I do, provided you let me hold consistently to my own
conception of truth, and do not ask me to abandon it for something which
I find impossible to comprehend.--You also believe, do you not, that
there is a truth, even in cases where it never shall be known?

Anti-Prag.:--I do indeed believe so.

Prag.:--Pray then inform me in what, according to you, this truth
regarding the unknown consists.

Anti-Prag.:--Consists?--pray what do you mean by 'consists'? It
consists in nothing but itself, or more properly speaking it has neither
consistence nor existence, it obtains, it holds.

Prag.:--Well, what relation does it bear to the reality of which it
holds?

Anti-Prag.:-How do you mean, 'what relation'? It holds of it, of course;
it knows it, it represents it.

Prag.:--Who knows it? What represents it?

Anti-Prag.:--The truth does; the truth knows it; or rather not exactly
that, but any one knows it who possesses the truth. Any true idea of the
reality represents the truth concerning it.

Prag.:--But I thought that we had agreed that no knower of it, nor any
idea representing it was to be supposed.

Anti-Prag.:--Sure enough!

Prag.:--Then I beg you again to tell me in what this truth consists, all
by itself, this tertium quid intermediate between the facts per se, on
the one hand, and all knowledge of them, actual or potential, on the
other. What is the shape of it in this third estate? Of what stuff,
mental, physical, or 'epistemological,' is it built? What metaphysical
region of reality does it inhabit?