To begin with, it must obtain between an idea and a reality that is the
idea's object; and, as a predicate, it must apply to the idea and not
to the object, for objective realities are not TRUE, at least not in the
universe of discourse to which we are now confining ourselves, for there
they are taken as simply BEING, while the ideas are true OF them. But we
can suppose a series of ideas to be successively more and more true
of the same object, and can ask what is the extreme approach to being
absolutely true that the last idea might attain to.

The maximal conceivable truth in an idea would seem to be that it should
lead to an actual merging of ourselves with the object, to an utter
mutual confluence and identification. On the common-sense level
of belief this is what is supposed really to take place in
sense-perception. My idea of this pen verifies itself through
my percept; and my percept is held to BE the pen for the time
being--percepts and physical realities being treated by common sense as
identical. But the physiology of the senses has criticised common sense
out of court, and the pen 'in itself' is now believed to lie beyond my
momentary percept. Yet the notion once suggested, of what a completely
consummated acquaintance with a reality might be like, remains over for
our speculative purposes. TOTAL CONFLUX OF THE MIND WITH THE REALITY
would be the absolute limit of truth, there could be no better or more
satisfying knowledge than that.

Such total conflux, it is needless to say, is ALREADY EXPLICITLY
PROVIDED FOR, AS A POSSIBILITY, IN MY ACCOUNT OF THE MATTER. If an idea
should ever lead us not only TOWARDS, or UP TO, or AGAINST, a reality,
but so close that we and the reality should MELT TOGETHER, it would be
made absolutely true, according to me, by that performance.

In point of fact philosophers doubt that this ever occurs. What happens,
they think, is only that we get nearer and nearer to realities,
we approximate more and more to the all-satisfying limit; and the
definition of actually, as distinguished from imaginably, complete and
objective truth, can then only be that it belongs to the idea that
will lead us as CLOSE UP AGAINST THE OBJECT as in the nature of our
experience is possible, literally NEXT to it, for instance.

Suppose, now, there were an idea that did this for a certain objective
reality. Suppose that no further approach were possible, that nothing
lay between, that the next step would carry us right INTO the reality;
then that result, being the next thing to conflux, would make the idea
true in the maximal degree that might be supposed practically attainable
in the world which we inhabit.

Well, I need hardly explain that THAT DEGREE OF TRUTH IS ALSO PROVIDED
FOR IN MY ACCOUNT OF THE MATTER. And if satisfactions are the marks of
truth's presence, we may add that any less true substitute for such a
true idea would prove less satisfactory. Following its lead, we should
probably find out that we did not quite touch the terminus. We should
desiderate a closer approach, and not rest till we had found it.