The idea is thus, when functionally considered, an instrument for
enabling us the better to HAVE TO DO with the object and to act about
it. But it and the object are both of them bits of the general sheet
and tissue of reality at large; and when we say that the idea leads us
towards the object, that only means that it carries us forward
through intervening tracts of that reality into the object's closer
neighborhood, into the midst of its associates at least, be these its
physical neighbors, or be they its logical congeners only. Thus carried
into closer quarters, we are in an improved situation as regards
acquaintance and conduct; and we say that through the idea we now KNOW
the object better or more truly.

My thesis is that the knowing here is MADE by the ambulation through the
intervening experiences. If the idea led us nowhere, or FROM that object
instead of towards it, could we talk at all of its having any cognitive
quality? Surely not, for it is only when taken in conjunction with the
intermediate experiences that it gets related to THAT PARTICULAR OBJECT
rather than to any other part of nature. Those intermediaries determine
what particular knowing function it exerts. The terminus they guide
us to tells us what object it 'means,' the results they enrich us
with 'verify' or 'refute' it. Intervening experiences are thus as
indispensable foundations for a concrete relation of cognition as
intervening space is for a relation of distance. Cognition, whenever
we take it concretely, means determinate 'ambulation,' through
intermediaries, from a terminus a quo to, or towards, a terminus ad
quem. As the intermediaries are other than the termini, and connected
with them by the usual associative bonds (be these 'external' or be they
logical, i.e., classificatory, in character), there would appear to
be nothing especially unique about the processes of knowing. They fall
wholly within experience; and we need use, in describing them, no
other categories than those which we employ in describing other natural
processes.

But there exist no processes which we cannot also consider abstractly,
eviscerating them down to their essential skeletons or outlines; and
when we have treated the processes of knowing thus, we are easily led to
regard them as something altogether unparalleled in nature. For we first
empty idea, object and intermediaries of all their particularities, in
order to retain only a general scheme, and then we consider the latter
only in its function of giving a result, and not in its character of
being a process. In this treatment the intermediaries shrivel into the
form of a mere space of separation, while the idea and object retain
only the logical distinctness of being the end-terms that are separated.
In other words, the intermediaries which in their concrete particularity
form a bridge, evaporate ideally into an empty interval to cross, and
then, the relation of the end-terms having become saltatory, the whole
hocus-pocus of Erkenntnistheorie begins, and goes on unrestrained
by further concrete considerations. The idea, in 'meaning' an object
separated by an 'epistemological chasm' from itself, now executes what
Professor Ladd calls a 'salto mortale'; in knowing the object's nature,
it now 'transcends' its own. The object in turn becomes 'present' where
it is really absent, etc.; until a scheme remains upon our hands, the
sublime paradoxes of which some of us think that nothing short of an
'absolute' can explain.