The anti-pragmatist is guilty of the further confusion of imagining
that, in undertaking to give him an account of what truth formally
means, we are assuming at the same time to provide a warrant for
it, trying to define the occasions when he can be sure of materially
possessing it. Our making it hinge on a reality so 'independent' that
when it comes, truth comes, and when it goes, truth goes with it,
disappoints this naive expectation, so he deems our description
unsatisfactory. I suspect that under this confusion lies the still
deeper one of not discriminating sufficiently between the two notions,
truth and reality. Realities are not TRUE, they ARE; and beliefs are
true OF them. But I suspect that in the anti-pragmatist mind the two
notions sometimes swap their attributes. The reality itself, I fear, is
treated as if 'true' and conversely. Whoso tells us of the one, it is
then supposed, must also be telling us of the other; and a true idea
must in a manner BE, or at least YIELD without extraneous aid, the
reality it cognitively is possessed of.

To this absolute-idealistic demand pragmatism simply opposes its non
possumus. If there is to be truth, it says, both realities and beliefs
about them must conspire to make it; but whether there ever is such a
thing, or how anyone can be sure that his own beliefs possess it, it
never pretends to determine. That truth-satisfaction par excellence
which may tinge a belief unsatisfactory in other ways, it easily
explains as the feeling of consistency with the stock of previous
truths, or supposed truths, of which one's whole past experience may
have left one in possession.

But are not all pragmatists sure that their own belief is right? their
enemies will ask at this point; and this leads me to the

FIFTH MISUNDERSTANDING: WHAT PRAGMATISTS SAY IS INCONSISTENT WITH THEIR
SAYING SO.

A correspondent puts this objection as follows: 'When you say to your
audience, "pragmatism is the truth concerning truth," the first truth is
different from the second. About the first you and they are not to be at
odds; you are not giving them liberty to take or leave it according as
it works satisfactorily or not for their private uses. Yet the second
truth, which ought to describe and include the first, affirms this
liberty. Thus the INTENT of your utterance seems to contradict the
CONTENT of it.'