It gets rid, for example, of the whole agnostic controversy, by refusing
to entertain the hypothesis of trans-empirical reality at all. It gets
rid of any need for an absolute of the bradleyan type (avowedly sterile
for intellectual purposes) by insisting that the conjunctive relations
found within experience are faultlessly real. It gets rid of the need
of an absolute of the roycean type (similarly sterile) by its pragmatic
treatment of the problem of knowledge. As the views of knowledge,
reality and truth imputed to humanism have been those so far most
fiercely attacked, it is in regard to these ideas that a sharpening of
focus seems most urgently required. I proceed therefore to bring the
views which I impute to humanism in these respects into focus as briefly
as I can.

II

If the central humanistic thesis, printed above in italics, be accepted,
it will follow that, if there be any such thing at all as knowing, the
knower and the object known must both be portions of experience. One
part of experience must, therefore, either

(1) Know another part of experience--in other words, parts must, as
Professor Woodbridge says, [Footnote: In Science, November 4, 1904, p.
599.] represent ONE ANOTHER instead of representing realities outside of
'consciousness'--this case is that of conceptual knowledge; or else

(2) They must simply exist as so many ultimate THATS or facts of being,
in the first instance; and then, as a secondary complication, and
without doubling up its entitative singleness, any one and the same
THAT in experience must figure alternately as a thing known and as a
knowledge of the thing, by reason of two divergent kinds of context into
which, in the general course of experience, it gets woven. [Footnote:
This statement is probably excessively obscure to any one who has not
read my two articles 'Does Consciousness Exist?' and 'A World of Pure
Experience' in the Journal of Philosophy, vol. i, 1904.]

This second case is that of sense-perception. There is a stage of
thought that goes beyond common sense, and of it I shall say more
presently; but the common-sense stage is a perfectly definite
halting-place of thought, primarily for purposes of action; and, so long
as we remain on the common-sense stage of thought, object and subject
FUSE in the fact of 'presentation' or sense-perception-the pen and hand
which I now SEE writing, for example, ARE the physical realities which
those words designate. In this case there is no self-transcendency
implied in the knowing. Humanism, here, is only a more comminuted
IDENTITATSPHILOSOPHIE.