The first step in their campaign against 'relativismus' is entirely
in the air. They accuse relativists--and we pragmatists are typical
relativists--of being debarred by their self-adopted principles,
not only from the privilege which rationalist philosophers enjoy, of
believing that these principles of their own are truth impersonal and
absolute, but even of framing the abstract notion of such a truth, in
the pragmatic sense, of an ideal opinion in which all men might agree,
and which no man should ever wish to change. Both charges fall wide
of their mark. I myself, as a pragmatist, believe in my own account of
truth as firmly as any rationalist can possibly believe in his. And I
believe in it for the very reason that I have the idea of truth which
my learned adversaries contend that no pragmatist can frame. I expect,
namely, that the more fully men discuss and test my account, the more
they will agree that it fits, and the less will they desire a change.
I may of course be premature in this confidence, and the glory of
being truth final and absolute may fall upon some later revision and
correction of my scheme, which later will then be judged untrue in
just the measure in which it departs from that finally satisfactory
formulation. To admit, as we pragmatists do, that we are liable to
correction (even tho we may not expect it) involves the use on our
part of an ideal standard. Rationalists themselves are, as individuals,
sometimes sceptical enough to admit the abstract possibility of their
own present opinions being corrigible and revisable to some degree, so
the fact that the mere NOTION of an absolute standard should seem to
them so important a thing to claim for themselves and to deny to us is
not easy to explain. If, along with the notion of the standard, they
could also claim its exclusive warrant for their own fulminations now,
it would be important to them indeed. But absolutists like Rickert
freely admit the sterility of the notion, even in their own hands. Truth
is what we OUGHT to believe, they say, even tho no man ever did or shall
believe it, and even tho we have no way of getting at it save by the
usual empirical processes of testing our opinions by one another and
by facts. Pragmatically, then, this part of the dispute is idle. No
relativist who ever actually walked the earth [Footnote: Of course
the bugaboo creature called 'the sceptic' in the logic-books, who
dogmatically makes the statement that no statement, not even the one he
now makes, is true, is a mere mechanical toy--target for the rationalist
shooting-gallery--hit him and he turns a summersault--yet he is the only
sort of relativist whom my colleagues appear able to imagine to exist.]
has denied the regulative character in his own thinking of the notion of
absolute truth. What is challenged by relativists is the pretence on any
one's part to have found for certain at any given moment what the shape
of that truth is. Since the better absolutists agree in this, admitting
that the proposition 'There is absolute truth' is the only absolute
truth of which we can be sure, [Footnote: Compare Bickert's Gegenstand
der Erkentniss, pp. 187, 138. Munsterberg's version of this first truth
is that 'Es gibt eine Welt,'--see his Philosophie der Werte, pp. 38 and
74 And, after all, both these philosophers confess in the end that the
primal truth of which they consider our supposed denial so irrational
is not properly an insight at all, but a dogma adopted by the will which
any one who turns his back on duty may disregard! But if it all reverts
to 'the will to believe,' pragmatists have that privilege as well as
their critics.] further debate is practically unimportant, so we may
pass to their next charge.