In this continuing and corroborating, taken in no transcendental sense,
but denoting definitely felt transitions, LIES ALL THAT THE KNOWING OF
A PERCEPT BY AN IDEA CAN POSSIBLY CONTAIN OR SIGNIFY. Wherever such
transitions are felt, the first experience KNOWS the last one. Where
they do not, or where even as possibles they can not, intervene, there
can be no pretence of knowing. In this latter case the extremes will be
connected, if connected at all, by inferior relations--bare likeness or
succession, or by 'withness' alone. Knowledge of sensible realities thus
comes to life inside the tissue of experience. It is MADE; and made
by relations that unroll themselves in time. Whenever certain
intermediaries are given, such that, as they develop towards their
terminus, there is experience from point to point of one direction
followed, and finally of one process fulfilled, the result is that THEIR
STARTING-POINT THEREBY BECOMES A KNOWER AND THEIR TERMINUS AN OBJECT
MEANT OR KNOWN. That is all that knowing (in the simple case considered)
can be known-as, that is the whole of its nature, put into experiential
terms. Whenever such is the sequence of our experiences we may freely
say that we had the terminal object 'in mind' from the outset, even
altho AT the outset nothing was there in us but a flat piece of
substantive experience like any other, with no self-transcendency about
it, and no mystery save the mystery of coming into existence and of
being gradually followed by other pieces of substantive experience, with
conjunctively transitional experiences between. That is what we MEAN
here by the object's being 'in mind.' Of any deeper more real way of its
being in mind we have no positive conception, and we have no right to
discredit our actual experience by talking of such a way at all.

I know that many a reader will rebel at this. 'Mere intermediaries,' he
will say, 'even tho they be feelings of continuously growing fulfilment,
only SEPARATE the knower from the known, whereas what we have in
knowledge is a kind of immediate touch of the one by the other, an
"apprehension" in the etymological sense of the word, a leaping of the
chasm as by lightning, an act by which two terms are smitten into one
over the head of their distinctness. All these dead intermediaries of
yours are out of each other, and outside of their termini still.'