The object, for me, is just as much one part of reality as the idea
is another part. The truth of the idea is one relation of it to the
reality, just as its date and its place are other relations. All three
relations CONSIST of intervening parts of the universe which can in
every particular case be assigned and catalogued, and which differ in
every instance of truth, just as they differ with every date and place.

The pragmatist thesis, as Dr. Schiller and I hold it,--I prefer to let
Professor Dewey speak for himself,--is that the relation called 'truth'
is thus concretely DEFINABLE. Ours is the only articulate attempt in the
field to say positively what truth actually CONSISTS OF. Our denouncers
have literally nothing to oppose to it as an alternative. For them, when
an idea is true, it IS true, and there the matter terminates; the word
'true' being indefinable. The relation of the true idea to its object,
being, as they think, unique, it can be expressed in terms of nothing
else, and needs only to be named for any one to recognize and understand
it. Moreover it is invariable and universal, the same in every single
instance of truth, however diverse the ideas, the realities, and the
other relations between them may be.

Our pragmatist view, on the contrary, is that the truth-relation is a
definitely experienceable relation, and therefore describable as well
as namable; that it is not unique in kind, and neither invariable nor
universal. The relation to its object that makes an idea true in any
given instance, is, we say, embodied in intermediate details of reality
which lead towards the object, which vary in every instance, and which
in every instance can be concretely traced. The chain of workings which
an opinion sets up IS the opinion's truth, falsehood, or irrelevancy,
as the case may be. Every idea that a man has works some consequences
in him, in the shape either of bodily actions or of other ideas. Through
these consequences the man's relations to surrounding realities are
modified. He is carried nearer to some of them and farther from others,
and gets now the feeling that the idea has worked satisfactorily, now
that it has not. The idea has put him into touch with something that
fulfils its intent, or it has not.