This is what, as a radical empiricist, I say to the charge that the
objective reference which is so flagrant a character of our experiences
involves a chasm and a mortal leap. A positively conjunctive transition
involves neither chasm nor leap. Being the very original of what we
mean by continuity, it makes a continuum wherever it appears. Objective
reference is an incident of the fact that so much of our experience
comes as an insufficient and consists of process and transition. Our
fields of experience have no more definite boundaries than have our
fields of view. Both are fringed forever by a MORE that continuously
develops, and that continuously supersedes them as life proceeds. The
relations, generally speaking, are as real here as the terms are, and
the only complaint of the transcendentalist's with which I could at
all sympathize would be his charge that, by first making knowledge to
consist in external relations as I have done, and by then confessing
that nine-tenths of the time these are not actually but only virtually
there, I have knocked the solid bottom out of the whole business, and
palmed off a substitute of knowledge for the genuine thing. Only the
admission, such a critic might say, that our ideas are self-transcendent
and 'true' already; in advance of the experiences that are to terminate
them, can bring solidity back to knowledge in a world like this, in
which transitions and terminations are only by exception fulfilled.

This seems to me an excellent place for applying the pragmatic method.
What would the self-transcendency affirmed to exist in advance of
all experiential mediation or termination, be KNOWN-AS? What would it
practically result in for US, were it true?

It could only result in our orientation, in the turning of our
expectations and practical tendencies into the right path; and the right
path here, so long as we and the object are not yet face to face (or
can never get face to face, as in the case of ejects), would be the
path that led us into the object's nearest neighborhood. Where direct
acquaintance is lacking, 'knowledge about' is the next best thing, and
an acquaintance with what actually lies about the 'object, and is most
closely related to it, puts such knowledge within our grasp. Ether-waves
and your anger, for example, are things in which my thoughts will never
PERCTEPTUALLY terminate, but my concepts of them lead me to their very
brink, to the chromatic fringes and to the hurtful words and deeds which
are their really next effects.

Even if our ideas did in themselves possess the postulated
self-transcendency, it would still remain true that their putting us
into possession of such effects WOULD BE THE SOLE CASH-VALUE OF THE
SELF-TRANSCENDENCY FOR US. And this cash-value, it is needless to
say, is verbatim et liberatim what our empiricist account pays in. On
pragmatist principles therefore, a dispute over self-transcendency is a
pure logomachy. Call our concepts of ejective things self-transcendent
or the reverse, it makes no difference, so long as we don't differ about
the nature of that exalted virtue's fruits--fruits for us, of course,
humanistic fruits.