Experience is a process that continually gives us new material to
digest. We handle this intellectually by the mass of beliefs of which
we find ourselves already possessed, assimilating, rejecting, or
rearranging in different degrees. Some of the apperceiving ideas are
recent acquisitions of our own, but most of them are common-sense
traditions of the race. There is probably not a common-sense tradition,
of all those which we now live by, that was not in the first instance
a genuine discovery, an inductive generalization like those more recent
ones of the atom, of inertia, of energy, of reflex action, or of fitness
to survive The notions of one Time and of one Space as single continuous
receptacles; the distinction between thoughts and things, matter and
mind between permanent subjects and changing attributes; the conception
of classes with sub classes within them; the separation of fortuitous
from regularly caused connections; surely all these were once definite
conquests made at historic dates by our ancestors in their attempt
to get the chaos of their crude individual experiences into a more
shareable and manageable shape. They proved of such sovereign use as
denkmittel that they are now a part of the very structure of our mind.
We cannot play fast and loose with them. No experience can upset them.
On the contrary, they apperceive every experience and assign it to its
place.

To what effect? That we may the better foresee the course of our
experiences, communicate with one another, and steer our lives by rule.
Also that we may have a cleaner, clearer, more inclusive mental view.

The greatest common-sense achievement, after the discovery of one Time
and one Space, is probably the concept of permanently existing things.
When a rattle first drops out of the hand of a baby, he does not look to
see where it has gone. Non-perception he accepts as annihilation until
he finds a better belief. That our perceptions mean BEINGS, rattles
that are there whether we hold them in our hands or not, becomes an
interpretation so luminous of what happens to us that, once employed,
it never gets forgotten. It applies with equal felicity to things and
persons, to the objective and to the ejective realm. However a Berkeley,
a Mill, or a Cornelius may CRITICISE it, it WORKS; and in practical
life we never think of 'going back' upon it, or reading our incoming
experiences in any other terms. We may, indeed, speculatively imagine
a state of 'pure' experience before the hypothesis of permanent objects
behind its flux had been framed; and we can play with the idea that some
primeval genius might have struck into a different hypothesis. But we
cannot positively imagine today what the different hypothesis could have
been, for the category of trans-perceptual reality is now one of the
foundations of our life. Our thoughts must still employ it if they are
to possess reasonableness and truth.