Take an example where there can be no possible working. Suppose I have
an idea to which I give utterance by the vocable 'skrkl,' claiming at
the same time that it is true. Who now can say that it is FALSE, for why
may there not be somewhere in the unplumbed depths of the cosmos some
object with which 'skrkl' can agree and have trueness in Dr. Pratt's
sense? On the other hand who can say that it is TRUE, for who can lay
his hand on that object and show that it and nothing else is what I MEAN
by my word? But yet again, who can gainsay any one who shall call my
word utterly IRRELATIVE to other reality, and treat it as a bare fact in
my mind, devoid of any cognitive function whatever. One of these
three alternatives must surely be predicated of it. For it not to be
irrelevant (or not-cognitive in nature), an object of some kind must be
provided which it may refer to. Supposing that object provided, whether
'skrkl' is true or false of it, depends, according to Professor Pratt,
on no intermediating condition whatever. The trueness or the falsity is
even now immediately, absolutely, and positively there.

I, on the other hand, demand a cosmic environment of some kind to
establish which of them is there rather than utter irrelevancy.
[Footnote: Dr. Pratt, singularly enough, disposes of this primal
postulate of all pragmatic epistemology, by saying that the pragmatist
'unconsciously surrenders his whole case by smuggling in the idea of a
conditioning environment which determines whether or not the experience
can work, and which cannot itself be identified with the experience or
any part of it' (pp. 167-168). The 'experience' means here of course the
idea, or belief; and the expression 'smuggling in' is to the last degree
diverting. If any epistemologist could dispense with a conditioning
environment, it would seem to be the antipragmatist, with his immediate
saltatory trueness, independent of work done. The mediating pathway
which the environment supplies is the very essence of the pragmatist's
explanation.] I then say, first, that unless some sort of a natural path
exists between the 'skrkl' and THAT object, distinguishable among the
innumerable pathways that run among all the realities of the universe,
linking them promiscuously with one another, there is nothing there to
constitute even the POSSIBILITY OF ITS REFERRING to that object rather
than to any other.

I say furthermore that unless it have some TENDENCY TO FOLLOW UP THAT
PATH, there is nothing to constitute its INTENTION to refer to the
object in question.

Finally, I say that unless the path be strown with possibilities
of frustration or encouragement, and offer some sort of terminal
satisfaction or contradiction, there is nothing to constitute its
agreement or disagreement with that object, or to constitute the as-ness
(or 'not-as-ness') in which the trueness (or falseness) is said to
consist.

I think that Dr. Pratt ought to do something more than repeat the name
'trueness,' in answer to my pathetic question whether that there be not
some CONSTITUTION to a relation as important as this. The pathway, the
tendency, the corroborating or contradicting progress, need not in every
case be experienced in full, but I don't see, if the universe doesn't
contain them among its possibilities of furniture, what LOGICAL MATERIAL
FOR DEFINING the trueness of my idea is left. But if it do contain them,
they and they only are the logical material required.