Truth thus means, according to humanism, the relation of less fixed
parts of experience (predicates) to other relatively more fixed
parts (subjects); and we are not required to seek it in a relation of
experience as such to anything beyond itself. We can stay at home, for
our behavior as exponents is hemmed in on every side. The forces both of
advance and of resistance are exerted by our own objects, and the notion
of truth as something opposed to waywardness or license inevitably grows
up SOLIPSISTICALLY inside of every human life.

So obvious is all this that a common charge against the humanistic
authors 'makes me tired.' 'How can a deweyite discriminate sincerity
from bluff?' was a question asked at a philosophic meeting where I
reported on Dewey's Studies. 'How can the mere [Footnote: I know of no
'mere' pragmatist, if MERENESS here means, as it seems to, the denial of
all concreteness to the pragmatist's THOUGHT.] pragmatist feel any duty
to think truly?' is the objection urged by Professor Royce. Mr. Bradley
in turn says that if a humanist understands his own doctrine, 'he must
hold any idea, however mad, to be the truth, if any one will have it
so.' And Professor Taylor describes pragmatism as believing anything one
pleases and calling it truth.

Such a shallow sense of the conditions under which men's thinking
actually goes on seems to me most surprising. These critics appear to
suppose that, if left to itself, the rudderless raft of our experience
must be ready to drift anywhere or nowhere. Even THO there were
compasses on board, they seem to say, there would be no pole for them
to point to. There must be absolute sailing-directions, they insist,
decreed from outside, and an independent chart of the voyage added to
the 'mere' voyage itself, if we are ever to make a port. But is it not
obvious that even THO there be such absolute sailing-directions in the
shape of pre-human standards of truth that we OUGHT to follow, the
only guarantee that we shall in fact follow them must lie in our human
equipment. The 'ought' would be a brutum fulmen unless there were a felt
grain inside of our experience that conspired. As a matter of fact the
DEVOUTEST believers in absolute standards must admit that men fail to
obey them. Waywardness is here, in spite of the eternal prohibitions,
and the existence of any amount of reality ante rem is no warrant
against unlimited error in rebus being incurred. The only REAL guarantee
we have against licentious thinking is the CIRCUMPRESSURE of experience
itself, which gets us sick of concrete errors, whether there be a
trans-empirical reality or not. How does the partisan of absolute
reality know what this orders him to think? He cannot get direct sight
of the absolute; and he has no means of guessing what it wants of him
except by following the humanistic clues. The only truth that he
himself will ever practically ACCEPT will be that to which his finite
experiences lead him of themselves. The state of mind which shudders
at the idea of a lot of experiences left to themselves, and that
augurs protection from the sheer name of an absolute, as if, however
inoperative, that might still stand for a sort of ghostly security, is
like the mood of those good people who, whenever they hear of a
social tendency that is damnable, begin to redden and to puff, and
say 'Parliament or Congress ought to make a law against it,' as if an
impotent decree would give relief.