This is just another of those objections by which the anti-humanists
show their own comparatively slack hold on the realities of the
situation. If they would only follow the pragmatic method and ask:
'What is truth KNOWN-AS? What does its existence stand for in the way of
concrete goods?'--they would see that the name of it is the inbegriff
of almost everything that is valuable in our lives. The true is
the opposite of whatever is instable, of whatever is practically
disappointing, of whatever is useless, of whatever is lying and
unreliable, of whatever is unverifiable and unsupported, of whatever is
inconsistent and contradictory, of whatever is artificial and eccentric,
of whatever is unreal in the sense of being of no practical account.
Here are pragmatic reasons with a vengeance why we should turn to
truth--truth saves us from a world of that complexion. What wonder that
its very name awakens loyal feeling! In particular what wonder that all
little provisional fool's paradises of belief should appear contemptible
in comparison with its bare pursuit! When absolutists reject humanism
because they feel it to be untrue, that means that the whole habit of
their mental needs is wedded already to a different view of reality, in
comparison with which the humanistic world seems but the whim of a few
irresponsible youths. Their own subjective apperceiving mass is what
speaks here in the name of the eternal natures and bids them reject
our humanism--as they apprehend it. Just so with us humanists, when
we condemn all noble, clean-cut, fixed, eternal, rational, temple-like
systems of philosophy. These contradict the DRAMATIC TEMPERAMENT of
nature, as our dealings with nature and our habits of thinking have so
far brought us to conceive it. They seem oddly personal and artificial,
even when not bureaucratic and professional in an absurd degree. We turn
from them to the great unpent and unstayed wilderness of truth as we
feel it to be constituted, with as good a conscience as rationalists
are moved by when they turn from our wilderness into their neater and
cleaner intellectual abodes. [Footnote: I cannot forbear quoting as an
illustration of the contrast between humanist and rationalist tempers of
mind, in a sphere remote from philosophy, these remarks on the Dreyfus
'affaire,' written by one who assuredly had never heard of humanism or
pragmatism. 'Autant que la Revolution, "l'Affaire" est desormais une de
nos "origines." Si elle n'a pas fait ouvrir le gouffre, c'est elle du
moins qui a rendu patent et visible le long travail souterrain qui,
silencieusement, avait prepare la separation entre nos deux camps
d'aujourd'hui, pour ecarter enfin, d'un coup soudain, la France
des traditionalistes (poseurs de principes, chercheurs d'unite,
constructeurs de systemes a priori) el la France eprise du fait positif
et de libre examen;--la France revolutionnaire et romantique si l'on
veut, celle qui met tres haut l'individu, qui ne veut pas qu'un juste
perisse, fut-ce pour sauver la nation, et qui cherche la verite dans
toutes ses parties aussi bien que dans une vue d'ensemble ... Duclaux ne
pouvait pas concevoir qu'on preferat quelque chose a la verite. Mais il
voyait autour de lui de fort honnetes gens qui, mettant en balance la
vie d'un homme et la raison d'Etat, lui avouaient de quel poids leger
ils jugeaient une simple existence individuelle, pour innocente qu'elle
fut. C'etaient des classiques, des gens a qui l'ensemble seul importe.'
La Vie de Emile Duclaux, par Mme. Em. D., Laval, 1906, pp. 243,
247-248.]