This is surely enough to show that the humanist does not ignore the
character of objectivity and independence in truth. Let me turn next to
what his opponents mean when they say that to be true, our thoughts must
'correspond.'

The vulgar notion of correspondence here is that the thoughts must COPY
the reality--cognitio fit per assimiliationem cogniti et cognoscentis;
and philosophy, without having ever fairly sat down to the question,
seems to have instinctively accepted this idea: propositions are held
true if they copy the eternal thought; terms are held true if they copy
extra-mental realities. Implicitly, I think that the copy-theory has
animated most of the criticisms that have been made on humanism.

A priori, however, it is not self-evident that the sole business of
our mind with realities should be to copy them. Let my reader suppose
himself to constitute for a time all the reality there is in the
universe, and then to receive the announcement that another being is to
be created who shall know him truly. How will he represent the knowing
in advance? What will he hope it to be? I doubt extremely whether it
could ever occur to him to fancy it as a mere copying. Of what use to
him would an imperfect second edition of himself in the new comer's
interior be? It would seem pure waste of a propitious opportunity. The
demand would more probably be for something absolutely new. The reader
would conceive the knowing humanistically, 'the new comer,' he would
say, 'must TAKE ACCOUNT OF MY PRESENCE BY REACTING ON IT IN SUCH A WAY
THAT GOOD WOULD ACCRUE TO US BOTH. If copying be requisite to that end,
let there be copying; otherwise not.' The essence in any case would not
be the copying, but the enrichment of the previous world.

I read the other day, in a book of Professor Eucken's, a phrase, 'Die
erhohung des vorgefundenen daseins,' which seems to be pertinent here.
Why may not thought's mission be to increase and elevate, rather than
simply to imitate and reduplicate, existence? No one who has read Lotze
can fail to remember his striking comment on the ordinary view of the
secondary qualities of matter, which brands them as 'illusory' because
they copy nothing in the thing. The notion of a world complete in
itself, to which thought comes as a passive mirror, adding nothing
to fact, Lotze says is irrational. Rather is thought itself a most
momentous part of fact, and the whole mission of the pre-existing and
insufficient world of matter may simply be to provoke thought to produce
its far more precious supplement.

'Knowing,' in short, may, for aught we can see beforehand to the
contrary, be ONLY ONE WAY OF GETTING INTO FRUITFUL RELATIONS WITH
REALITY whether copying be one of the relations or not.