General scepticism has always received this same classic refutation.
'You have to dogmatize,' the rationalists say to the sceptics,' whenever
you express the sceptical position; so your lives keep contradicting
your thesis.' One would suppose that the impotence of so hoary an
argument to abate in the slightest degree the amount of general
scepticism in the world might have led some rationalists themselves to
doubt whether these instantaneous logical refutations are such
fatal ways, after all, of killing off live mental attitudes. General
scepticism is the live mental attitude of refusing to conclude. It is
a permanent torpor of the will, renewing itself in detail towards each
successive thesis that offers, and you can no more kill it off by logic
than you can kill off obstinacy or practical joking. This is why it is
so irritating. Your consistent sceptic never puts his scepticism into
a formal proposition,--he simply chooses it as a habit. He provokingly
hangs back when he might so easily join us in saying yes, but he is
not illogical or stupid,--on the contrary, he often impresses us by his
intellectual superiority. This is the REAL scepticism that rationalists
have to meet, and their logic does not even touch it.

No more can logic kill the pragmatist's behavior: his act of utterance,
so far from contradicting, accurately exemplifies the matter which he
utters. What is the matter which he utters? In part, it is this, that
truth, concretely considered, is an attribute of our beliefs, and that
these are attitudes that follow satisfactions. The ideas around which
the satisfactions cluster are primarily only hypotheses that
challenge or summon a belief to come and take its stand upon them.
The pragmatist's idea of truth is just such a challenge. He finds it
ultra-satisfactory to accept it, and takes his own stand accordingly.
But, being gregarious as they are, men seek to spread their beliefs,
to awaken imitation, to infect others. Why should not YOU also find the
same belief satisfactory? thinks the pragmatist, and forthwith endeavors
to convert you. You and he will then believe similarly; you will hold
up your subject-end of a truth, which will be a truth objective and
irreversible if the reality holds up the object-end by being itself
present simultaneously. What there is of self-contradiction in all this
I confess I cannot discover. The pragmatist's conduct in his own case
seems to me on the contrary admirably to illustrate his universal
formula; and of all epistemologists, he is perhaps the only one who is
irreproachably self-consistent.

SIXTH MISUNDERSTANDING: PRAGMATISM EXPLAINS NOT WHAT TRUTH IS, BUT ONLY
HOW IT IS ARRIVED AT.

In point of fact it tells us both, tells us what it is incidentally to
telling us how it is arrived at,--for what IS arrived at except just
what the truth is? If I tell you how to get to the railroad station,
don't I implicitly introduce you to the WHAT, to the being and nature of
that edifice? It is quite true that the abstract WORD 'how' hasn't
the same meaning as the abstract WORD 'what,' but in this universe of
concrete facts you cannot keep hows and whats asunder. The reasons why
I find it satisfactory to believe that any idea is true, the HOW of my
arriving at that belief, may be among the very reasons why the idea IS
true in reality. If not, I summon the anti-pragmatist to explain the
impossibility articulately.