But may not real terms, I now ask, have accidents not expressed in their
definitions? and when a real value is finally substituted for the result
of an algebraic series of substituted definitions, do not all these
accidents creep back? Beliefs have their objective 'content' or
'deliverance' as well as their truth, and truth has its implications
as well as its workings. If any one believe that other men exist, it is
both a content of his belief and an implication of its truth, that they
should exist in fact. Mr. Russell's logic would seem to exclude,
'by definition,' all such accidents as contents, implications, and
associates, and would represent us as translating all belief into a sort
of belief in pragmatism itself--of all things! If I say that a speech is
eloquent, and explain 'eloquent' as meaning the power to work in certain
ways upon the audience; or if I say a book is original, and define
'original' to mean differing from other books, Russell's logic, if I
follow it at all, would seem to doom me to agreeing that the speech is
about eloquence, and the book about other books. When I call a belief
true, and define its truth to mean its workings, I certainly do not mean
that the belief is a belief ABOUT the workings. It is a belief about the
object, and I who talk about the workings am a different subject, with
a different universe of discourse, from that of the believer of whose
concrete thinking I profess to give an account.

The social proposition 'other men exist' and the pragmatist proposition
'it is expedient to believe that other men exist' come from different
universes of discourse. One can believe the second without being
logically compelled to believe the first; one can believe the first
without having ever heard of the second; or one can believe them both.
The first expresses the object of a belief, the second tells of one
condition of the belief's power to maintain itself. There is no identity
of any kind, save the term 'other men' which they contain in common, in
the two propositions; and to treat them as mutually substitutable, or
to insist that we shall do so, is to give up dealing with realities
altogether.

Mr. Ralph Hawtrey, who seems also to serve under the banner of
abstractionist logic, convicts us pragmatists of absurdity by arguments
similar to Mr. Russell's. [Footnote: See The New Quarterly, for March,
1908.]

As a favor to us and for the sake of the argument, he abandons the
word 'true' to our fury, allowing it to mean nothing but the fact that
certain beliefs are expedient; and he uses the word 'correctness' (as
Mr. Pratt uses the word 'trueness') to designate a fact, not about the
belief, but about the belief's object, namely that it is as the belief
declares it. 'When therefore,' he writes, 'I say it is correct to say
that Caesar is dead, I mean "Caesar is dead." This must be regarded as
the definition of correctness.' And Mr. Hawtrey then goes on to demolish
me by the conflict of the definitions. What is 'true' for the pragmatist
cannot be what is 'correct,' he says, 'for the definitions are not
logically interchangeable; or if we interchange them, we reach the
tautology:

"Caesar is dead" means "it is expedient to believe that Caesar is dead."
But what is it expedient to believe? Why, "that Caesar is dead." A
precious definition indeed of 'Caesar is dead.'