I have read in the past six months many hostile reviews of Schiller's
and Dewey's publications; but with the exception of Mr. Bradley's
elaborate indictment, they are out of reach where I write, and I have
largely forgotten them. I think that a free discussion of the subject
on my part would in any case be more useful than a polemic attempt at
rebutting these criticisms in detail. Mr. Bradley in particular can be
taken care of by Mr. Schiller. He repeatedly confesses himself unable
to comprehend Schiller's views, he evidently has not sought to do so
sympathetically, and I deeply regret to say that his laborious article
throws, for my mind, absolutely no useful light upon the subject.
It seems to me on the whole an IGNORATIO ELENCHI, and I feel free to
disregard it altogether.

The subject is unquestionably difficult. Messrs. Dewey's and Schiller's
thought is eminently an induction, a generalization working itself free
from all sorts of entangling particulars. If true, it involves much
restatement of traditional notions. This is a kind of intellectual
product that never attains a classic form of expression when first
promulgated. The critic ought therefore not to be too sharp and
logic-chopping in his dealings with it, but should weigh it as a whole,
and especially weigh it against its possible alternatives. One should
also try to apply it first to one instance, and then to another to see
how it will work. It seems to me that it is emphatically not a case
for instant execution, by conviction of intrinsic absurdity or of
self-contradiction, or by caricature of what it would look like if
reduced to skeleton shape. Humanism is in fact much more like one of
those secular changes that come upon public opinion overnight, as it
were, borne upon tides 'too deep for sound or foam,' that survive all
the crudities and extravagances of their advocates, that you can pin
to no one absolutely essential statement, nor kill by any one decisive
stab.

Such have been the changes from aristocracy to democracy, from classic
to romantic taste, from theistic to pantheistic feeling, from static to
evolutionary ways of understanding life--changes of which we all have
been spectators. Scholasticism still opposes to such changes the method
of confutation by single decisive reasons, showing that the new view
involves self-contradiction, or traverses some fundamental principle.
This is like stopping a river by planting a stick in the middle of its
bed. Round your obstacle flows the water and 'gets there all the same.'
In reading some of our opponents, I am not a little reminded of those
catholic writers who refute darwinism by telling us that higher species
cannot come from lower because minus nequit gignere plus, or that the
notion of transformation is absurd, for it implies that species tend to
their own destruction, and that would violate the principle that every
reality tends to persevere in its own shape. The point of view is too
myopic, too tight and close to take in the inductive argument. Wide
generalizations in science always meet with these summary refutations in
their early days; but they outlive them, and the refutations then sound
oddly antiquated and scholastic. I cannot help suspecting that the
humanistic theory is going through this kind of would-be refutation at
present.