One more remark. Our formula contains, it will be observed, nothing to
correspond to the great principle of cognition laid down by Professor
Ferrier in his Institutes of Metaphysic and apparently adopted by all
the followers of Fichte, the principle, namely, that for knowledge to
be constituted there must be knowledge of the knowing mind along with
whatever else is known: not q, as we have supposed, but q PLUS MYSELF,
must be the least I can know. It is certain that the common sense
of mankind never dreams of using any such principle when it tries to
discriminate between conscious states that are knowledge and conscious
states that are not. So that Ferrier's principle, if it have any
relevancy at all, must have relevancy to the metaphysical possibility
of consciousness at large, and not to the practically recognized
constitution of cognitive consciousness. We may therefore pass it by
without further notice here.] It is to be feared that the reader may
consider this formula rather insignificant and obvious, and hardly worth
the labor of so many pages, especially when he considers that the only
cases to which it applies are percepts, and that the whole field of
symbolic or conceptual thinking seems to elude its grasp. Where the
reality is either a material thing or act, or a state of the critic's
consciousness, I may both mirror it in my mind and operate upon it--in
the latter case indirectly, of course--as soon as I perceive it. But
there are many cognitions, universally allowed to be such, which neither
mirror nor operate on their realities.

In the whole field of symbolic thought we are universally held both
to intend, to speak of, and to reach conclusions about--to know
in short--particular realities, without having in our subjective
consciousness any mind-stuff that resembles them even in a remote
degree. We are instructed about them by language which awakens no
consciousness beyond its sound; and we know WHICH realities they are by
the faintest and most fragmentary glimpse of some remote context they
may have and by no direct imagination of themselves. As minds may differ
here, let me speak in the first person. I am sure that my own current
thinking has WORDS for its almost exclusive subjective material, words
which are made intelligible by being referred to some reality that lies
beyond the horizon of direct consciousness, and of which I am only aware
as of a terminal MORE existing in a certain direction, to which the
words might lead but do not lead yet. The SUBJECT, or TOPIC, of the
words is usually something towards which I mentally seem to pitch them
in a backward way, almost as I might jerk my thumb over my shoulder to
point at something, without looking round, if I were only entirely sure
that it was there. The UPSHOT, or CONCLUSION, of the words is something
towards which I seem to incline my head forwards, as if giving assent to
its existence, tho all my mind's eye catches sight of may be some tatter
of an image connected with it, which tatter, however, if only endued
with the feeling of familiarity and reality, makes me feel that the
whole to which it belongs is rational and real, and fit to be let pass.