His trouble seems to me mainly to arise from his fixed inability to
understand how a concrete statement can possibly mean as much, or be as
valuable, as an abstract one. I said above that the main quarrel between
us and our critics was that of concreteness VERSUS abstractness. This is
the place to develop that point farther.

In the present question, the links of experience sequent upon an idea,
which mediate between it and a reality, form and for the pragmatist
indeed ARE, the CONCRETE relation of truth that may obtain between the
idea and that reality. They, he says, are all that we mean when we speak
of the idea 'pointing' to the reality, 'fitting' it, 'corresponding'
with it, or 'agreeing' with it,--they or other similar mediating trains
of verification. Such mediating events make the idea 'true.' The idea
itself, if it exists at all, is also a concrete event: so pragmatism
insists that truth in the singular is only a collective name for truths
in the plural, these consisting always of series of definite events; and
that what intellectualism calls the truth, the inherent truth, of any
one such series is only the abstract name for its truthfulness in act,
for the fact that the ideas there do lead to the supposed reality in a
way that we consider satisfactory.

The pragmatist himself has no objection to abstractions. Elliptically,
and 'for short,' he relies on them as much as any one, ending upon
innumerable occasions that their comparative emptiness makes of them
useful substitutes for the overfulness of the facts he meets, with. But
he never ascribes to them a higher grade of reality. The full reality
of a truth for him is always some process of verification, in which the
abstract property of connecting ideas with objects truly is workingly
embodied. Meanwhile it is endlessly serviceable to be able to talk of
properties abstractly and apart from their working, to find them the
same in innumerable cases, to take them 'out of time,' and to treat
of their relations to other similar abstractions. We thus form whole
universes of platonic ideas ante rem, universes in posse, tho none of
them exists effectively except in rebus. Countless relations obtain
there which nobody experiences as obtaining,--as, in the eternal
universe of musical relations, for example, the notes of Aennchen von
Tharau were a lovely melody long ere mortal ears ever heard them. Even
so the music of the future sleeps now, to be awakened hereafter. Or, if
we take the world of geometrical relations, the thousandth decimal of
'pi' sleeps there, tho no one may ever try to compute it. Or, if we take
the universe of 'fitting,' countless coats 'fit' backs, and countless
boots 'fit' feet, on which they are not practically FITTED; countless
stones 'fit' gaps in walls into which no one seeks to fit them actually.
In the same way countless opinions 'fit' realities, and countless truths
are valid, tho no thinker ever thinks them.

For the anti-pragmatist these prior timeless relations are the
presupposition of the concrete ones, and possess the profounder dignity
and value. The actual workings of our ideas in verification-processes
are as naught in comparison with the 'obtainings' of this discarnate
truth within them.