Of course, if you take the satisfactoriness concretely, as something
felt by you now, and if, by truth, you mean truth taken abstractly
and verified in the long run, you cannot make them equate, for it is
notorious that the temporarily satisfactory is often false. Yet at each
and every concrete moment, truth for each man is what that man 'troweth'
at that moment with the maximum of satisfaction to himself; and
similarly, abstract truth, truth verified by the long run, and abstract
satisfactoriness, long-run satisfactoriness, coincide. If, in short, we
compare concrete with concrete and abstract with abstract, the true
and the satisfactory do mean the same thing. I suspect that a certain
muddling of matters hereabouts is what makes the general philosophic
public so impervious to humanism's claims.

The fundamental fact about our experience is that it is a process of
change. For the 'trower' at any moment, truth, like the visible area
round a man walking in a fog, or like what George Eliot calls 'the
wall of dark seen by small fishes' eyes that pierce a span in the wide
Ocean,' is an objective field which the next moment enlarges and of
which it is the critic, and which then either suffers alteration or is
continued unchanged. The critic sees both the first trower's truth and
his own truth, compares them with each other, and verifies or confutes.
HIS field of view is the reality independent of that earlier trower's
thinking with which that thinking ought to correspond. But the critic
is himself only a trower; and if the whole process of experience should
terminate at that instant, there would be no otherwise known independent
reality with which HIS thought might be compared.

The immediate in experience is always provisionally in this situation.
The humanism, for instance, which I see and try so hard to defend, is
the completest truth attained from my point of view up to date. But,
owing to the fact that all experience is a process, no point of view can
ever be THE last one. Every one is insufficient and off its balance, and
responsible to later points of view than itself. You, occupying some of
these later points in your own person, and believing in the reality of
others, will not agree that my point of view sees truth positive, truth
timeless, truth that counts, unless they verify and confirm what it
sees.

You generalize this by saying that any opinion, however satisfactory,
can count positively and absolutely as true only so far as it agrees
with a standard beyond itself; and if you then forget that this standard
perpetually grows up endogenously inside the web of the experiences,
you may carelessly go on to say that what distributively holds of
each experience, holds also collectively of all experience, and that
experience as such and in its totality owes whatever truth it may be
possessed-of to its correspondence with absolute realities outside of
its own being. This evidently is the popular and traditional position.
From the fact that finite experiences must draw support from one
another, philosophers pass to the notion that experience uberhaupt must
need an absolute support. The denial of such a notion by humanism lies
probably at the root of most of the dislike which it incurs.