We may now glance at some special types of knowing, so as to see better
whether the humanistic account fits. On the mathematical and logical
types we need not enlarge further, nor need we return at much length to
the case of our descriptive knowledge of the course of nature. So far
as this involves anticipation, tho that MAY mean copying, it need, as
we saw, mean little more than 'getting ready' in advance. But with many
distant and future objects, our practical relations are to the last
degree potential and remote. In no sense can we now get ready for the
arrest of the earth's revolution by the tidal brake, for instance; and
with the past, tho we suppose ourselves to know it truly, we have no
practical relations at all. It is obvious that, altho interests strictly
practical have been the original starting-point of our search for
true phenomenal descriptions, yet an intrinsic interest in the bare
describing function has grown up. We wish accounts that shall be true,
whether they bring collateral profit or not. The primitive function has
developed its demand for mere exercise. This theoretic curiosity seems
to be the characteristically human differentia, and humanism recognizes
its enormous scope. A true idea now means not only one that prepares us
for an actual perception. It means also one that might prepare us for
a merely possible perception, or one that, if spoken, would suggest
possible perceptions to others, or suggest actual perceptions which the
speaker cannot share. The ensemble of perceptions thus thought of
as either actual or possible form a system which it is obviously
advantageous to us to get into a stable and consistent shape; and here
it is that the common-sense notion of permanent beings finds triumphant
use. Beings acting outside of the thinker explain, not only his actual
perceptions, past and future, but his possible perceptions and those
of every one else. Accordingly they gratify our theoretic need in a
supremely beautiful way. We pass from our immediate actual through
them into the foreign and the potential, and back again into the future
actual, accounting for innumerable particulars by a single cause. As
in those circular panoramas, where a real foreground of dirt, grass,
bushes, rocks and a broken-down cannon is enveloped by a canvas picture
of sky and earth and of a raging battle, continuing the foreground so
cunningly that the spectator can detect no joint; so these conceptual
objects, added to our present perceptual reality, fuse with it into the
whole universe of our belief. In spite of all berkeleyan criticism, we
do not doubt that they are really there. Tho our discovery of any one of
them may only date from now, we unhesitatingly say that it not only
IS, but WAS there, if, by so saying, the past appears connected more
consistently with what we feel the present to be. This is historic
truth. Moses wrote the Pentateuch, we think, because if he didn't, all
our religious habits will have to be undone. Julius Caesar was real, or
we can never listen to history again. Trilobites were once alive, or
all our thought about the strata is at sea. Radium, discovered only
yesterday, must always have existed, or its analogy with other natural
elements, which are permanent, fails. In all this, it is but one portion
of our beliefs reacting on another so as to yield the most satisfactory
total state of mind. That state of mind, we say, sees truth, and the
content of its deliverances we believe.