Were there such spots of indifference, the rigorous determinists think,
the future and the past would be separated absolutely, for, ABSTRACTLY
TAKEN, THE WORD 'INDIFFERENT' SUGGESTS DISCONNECTION SOLELY. Whatever
is indifferent is in so far forth unrelated and detached. Take the
term thus strictly, and you see, they tell us, that if any spot of
indifference is found upon the broad highway between the past and the
future, then no connection of any sort whatever, no continuous momentum,
no identical passenger, no common aim or agent, can be found on both
sides of the shunt or switch which there is moved. The place is an
impassable chasm.

Mr. Fullerton writes--the italics are mine--as follows:--

'In so far as my action is free, what I have been, what I am, what I
have always done or striven to do, what I most earnestly wish or resolve
to do at the present moment--these things can have NO MORE TO DO WITH
ITS FUTURE REALIZATION THAN IF THEY HAD NO EXISTENCE.... The possibility
is a hideous one; and surely even the most ardent free-willist will,
when he contemplates it frankly, excuse me for hoping that if I am free
I am at least not very free, and that I may reasonably expect to find
SOME degree of consistency in my life and actions. ... Suppose that I
have given a dollar to a blind beggar. Can I, if it is really an act
of free-will, be properly said to have given the money? Was it given
because I was a man of tender heart, etc., etc.? ... What has all
this to do with acts of free-will? If they are free, they must not be
conditioned by antecedent circumstances of any sort, by the misery of
the beggar, by the pity in the heart of the passer-by. They must be
causeless, not determined. They must drop from a clear sky out of the
void, for just in so far as they can be accounted for, they are not
free.' [Footnote: Loc. cit., vol. lviii, pp. 189, 188.]

Heaven forbid that I should get entangled here in a controversy about
the rights and wrongs of the free-will question at large, for I am only
trying to illustrate vicious abstractionism by the conduct of some
of the doctrine's assailants. The moments of bifurcation, as the
indeterminist seems to himself to experience them, are moments both of
re-direction and of continuation. But because in the 'either--or' of the
re-direction we hesitate, the determinist abstracts this little element
of discontinuity from the superabundant continuities of the experience,
and cancels in its behalf all the connective characters with which the
latter is filled. Choice, for him, means henceforward DISconnection pure
and simple, something undetermined in advance IN ANY RESPECT WHATEVER,
and a life of choices must be a raving chaos, at no two moments of which
could we be treated as one and the same man. If Nero were 'free' at. the
moment of ordering his mother's murder, Mr. McTaggart [Footnote: Some
Dogmas of Religion, p. 179.] assures us that no one would have the
right at any other moment to call him a bad man, for he would then be an
absolutely other Nero.