For the feeling to be cognitive in the specific sense, then, it must be
self-transcendent; and we must prevail upon the god to CREATE A REALITY
OUTSIDE OF IT to correspond to its intrinsic quality Q. Thus only can
it be redeemed from the condition of being a solipsism. If now the new
created reality RESEMBLE the feeling's quality Q I say that the feeling
may be held by us TO BE COGNIZANT OF THAT REALITY.

This first instalment of my thesis is sure to be attacked. But one
word before defending it 'Reality' has become our warrant for calling
a feeling cognitive; but what becomes our warrant for calling anything
reality? The only reply is--the faith of the present critic or inquirer.
At every moment of his life he finds himself subject to a belief in SOME
realities, even though his realities of this year should prove to be his
illusions of the next. Whenever he finds that the feeling he is studying
contemplates what he himself regards as a reality, he must of course
admit the feeling itself to be truly cognitive. We are ourselves the
critics here; and we shall find our burden much lightened by being
allowed to take reality in this relative and provisional way. Every
science must make some assumptions. Erkenntnisstheoretiker are but
fallible mortals. When they study the function of cognition, they do
it by means of the same function in themselves. And knowing that the
fountain cannot go higher than its source, we should promptly confess
that our results in this field are affected by our own liability to
err. THE MOST WE CAN CLAIM IS, THAT WHAT WE SAY ABOUT COGNITION MAY BE
COUNTED AS TRUE AS WHAT WE SAY ABOUT ANYTHING ELSE. If our hearers agree
with us about what are to be held 'realities,' they will perhaps also
agree to the reality of our doctrine of the way in which they are known.
We cannot ask for more.

Our terminology shall follow the spirit of these remarks. We will deny
the function of knowledge to any feeling whose quality or content we do
not ourselves believe to exist outside of that feeling as well as in
it. We may call such a feeling a dream if we like; we shall have to see
later whether we can call it a fiction or an error.

To revert now to our thesis. Some persons will immediately cry out, 'How
CAN a reality resemble a feeling?' Here we find how wise we were to name
the quality of the feeling by an algebraic letter Q. We flank the whole
difficulty of resemblance between an inner state and an outward reality,
by leaving it free to any one to postulate as the reality whatever sort
of thing he thinks CAN resemble a feeling,--if not an outward thing,
then another feeling like the first one,--the mere feeling Q in the
critic's mind for example. Evading thus this objection, we turn to
another which is sure to be urged.