But do not such dialectic difficulties remind us of the dog dropping his
bone and snapping at its image in the water? If we knew any more real
kind of union aliunde, we might be entitled to brand all our empirical
unions as a sham. But unions by continuous transition are the only ones
we know of, whether in this matter of a knowledge-about that terminates
in an acquaintance, whether in personal identity, in logical prediction
through the copula 'is,' or elsewhere. If anywhere there were more
absolute unions, they could only reveal themselves to us by just such
conjunctive results. These are what the unions are worth, these are all
that we can ever practically mean by union, by continuity. Is it not
time to repeat what Lotze said of substances, that to act like one is to
be one? Should we not say here that to be experienced as continuous is
to be really continuous, in a world where experience and reality come to
the same thing? In a picture gallery a painted hook will serve to hang
a painted chain by, a painted cable will hold a painted ship. In a world
where both the terms and their distinctions are affairs of experience,
conjunctions that are experienced must be at least as real as anything
else. They will be 'absolutely' real conjunctions, if we have no
transphenomenal absolute ready, to derealize the whole experienced world
by, at a stroke.

So much for the essentials of the cognitive relation where the knowledge
is conceptual in type, or forms knowledge 'about' an object. It consists
in intermediary experiences (possible, if not actual) of continuously
developing progress, and, finally, of fulfilment, when the sensible
percept which is the object is reached. The percept here not only
VERIFIES the concept, proves its function of knowing that percept to
be true, but the percept's existence as the terminus of the chain of
intermediaries CREATES the function. Whatever terminates that chain was,
because it now proves itself to be, what the concept 'had in mind.'

The towering importance for human life of this kind of knowing lies
in the tact that an experience that knows another can figure as its
REPRESENTATIVE, not in any quasi-miraculous 'epistemological' sense,
but in the definite, practical sense of being its substitute in various
operations, sometimes physical and sometimes mental, which lead us to
its associates and results. By experimenting on our ideas of reality, we
may save ourselves the trouble of experimenting on the real experiences
which they severally mean. The ideas form related systems, corresponding
point for point to the systems which the realities form; and by letting
an ideal term call up its associates systematically, we may be led to a
terminus which the corresponding real term would have led to in case
we had operated on the real world. And this brings us to the general
question of substitution.

What, exactly, in a system of experiences, does the 'substitution' of
one of them for another mean?