My treatment of 'God,' 'freedom,' and 'design' was similar. Reducing,
by the pragmatic test, the meaning of each of these concepts to its
positive experienceable operation, I showed them all to mean the same
thing, viz., the presence of 'promise' in the world. 'God or no God?'
means 'promise or no promise?' It seems to me that the alternative is
objective enough, being a question as to whether the cosmos has one
character or another, even though our own provisional answer be made
on subjective grounds. Nevertheless christian and non-christian critics
alike accuse me of summoning people to say 'God exists,' EVEN WHEN HE
DOESN'T EXIST, because forsooth in my philosophy the 'truth' of the
saying doesn't really mean that he exists in any shape whatever, but
only that to say so feels good.

Most of the pragmatist and anti-pragmatist warfare is over what the word
'truth' shall be held to signify, and not over any of the facts embodied
in truth-situations; for both pragmatists and anti-pragmatists believe
in existent objects, just as they believe in our ideas of them. The
difference is that when the pragmatists speak of truth, they mean
exclusively some thing about the ideas, namely their workableness;
whereas when anti-pragmatists speak of truth they seem most often to
mean something about the objects. Since the pragmatist, if he agrees
that an idea is 'really' true, also agrees to whatever it says about
its object; and since most anti-pragmatists have already come round
to agreeing that, if the object exists, the idea that it does so is
workable; there would seem so little left to fight about that I might
well be asked why instead of reprinting my share in so much verbal
wrangling, I do not show my sense of 'values' by burning it all up.

I understand the question and I will give my answer. I am interested
in another doctrine in philosophy to which I give the name of radical
empiricism, and it seems to me that the establishment of the pragmatist
theory of truth is a step of first-rate importance in making radical
empiricism prevail. Radical empiricism consists first of a postulate,
next of a statement of fact, and finally of a generalized conclusion.

The postulate is that the only things that shall be debatable among
philosophers shall be things definable in terms drawn from experience.
[Things of an unexperienceable nature may exist ad libitum, but they
form no part of the material for philosophic debate.]

The statement of fact is that the relations between things, conjunctive
as well as disjunctive, are just as much matters of direct particular
experience, neither more so nor less so, than the things themselves.

The generalized conclusion is that therefore the parts of experience
hold together from next to next by relations that are themselves parts
of experience. The directly apprehended universe needs, in short, no
extraneous trans-empirical connective support, but possesses in its own
right a concatenated or continuous structure.