The relation between idea and object, thus made abstract and saltatory,
is thenceforward opposed, as being more essential and previous, to its
own ambulatory self, and the more concrete description is branded as
either false or insufficient. The bridge of intermediaries, actual
or possible, which in every real case is what carries and defines the
knowing, gets treated as an episodic complication which need not even
potentially be there. I believe that this vulgar fallacy of opposing
abstractions to the concretes from which they are abstracted, is the
main reason why my account of knowing is deemed so unsatisfactory, and I
will therefore say a word more on that general point.

Any vehicle of conjunction, if all its particularities are abstracted
from it, will leave us with nothing on our hands but the original
disjunction which it bridged over. But to escape treating the resultant
self-contradiction as an achievement of dialectical profundity, all we
need is to restore some part, no matter how small, of what we have taken
away. In the case of the epistemological chasm the first reasonable step
is to remember that the chasm was filled with SOME empirical material,
whether ideational or sensational, which performed SOME bridging
function and saved us from the mortal leap. Restoring thus the
indispensable modicum of reality to the matter of our discussion, we
find our abstract treatment genuinely useful. We escape entanglement
with special cases without at the same time falling into gratuitous
paradoxes. We can now describe the general features of cognition, tell
what on the whole it DOES FOR US, in a universal way.

We must remember that this whole inquiry into knowing grows up on a
reflective level. In any real moment of knowing, what we are thinking of
is our object, not the way in which we ourselves are momentarily knowing
it. We at this moment, as it happens, have knowing itself for our
object; but I think that the reader will agree that his present knowing
of that object is included only abstractly, and by anticipation, in
the results he may reach. What he concretely has before his mind, as he
reasons, is some supposed objective instance of knowing, as he conceives
it to go on in some other person, or recalls it from his own past. As
such, he, the critic, sees it to contain both an idea and an object, and
processes by which the knower is guided from the one towards the other.
He sees that the idea is remote from the object, and that, whether
through intermediaries or not, it genuinely HAS TO DO with it. He sees
that it thus works beyond its immediate being, and lays hold of a
remote reality; it jumps across, transcends itself. It does all this by
extraneous aid, to be sure, but when the aid has come, it HAS done it
and the result is secure. Why not talk of results by themselves, then,
without considering means? Why not treat the idea as simply grasping
or intuiting the reality, of its having the faculty anyhow, of shooting
over nature behind the scenes and knowing things immediately and
directly? Why need we always lug in the bridging?--it only retards our
discourse to do so.