Meanwhile what actually DOES count for true to any individual trower,
whether he be philosopher or common man, is always a result of his
APPERCEPTIONS. If a novel experience, conceptual or sensible, contradict
too emphatically our pre-existent system of beliefs, in ninety-nine
cases out of a hundred it is treated as false. Only when the older and
the newer experiences are congruous enough to mutually apperceive and
modify each other, does what we treat as an advance in truth result.
In no case, however, need truth consist in a relation between our
experiences and something archetypal or trans-experiential. Should we
ever reach absolutely terminal experiences, experiences in which we all
agreed, which were superseded by no revised continuations, these would
not be TRUE, they would be REAL, they would simply BE, and be indeed
the angles, corners, and linchpins of all reality, on which the truth of
everything else would be stayed. Only such OTHER things as led to these
by satisfactory conjunctions would be 'true.' Satisfactory connection of
some sort with such termini is all that the word 'truth' means. On the
common-stage of thought sense-presentations serve as such termini. Our
ideas and concepts and scientific theories pass for true only so far as
they harmoniously lead back to the world of sense.

I hope that many humanists will endorse this attempt of mine to trace
the more essential features of that way of viewing things. I feel almost
certain that Messrs. Dewey and Schiller will do so. If the attackers
will also take some slight account of it, it may be that discussion will
be a little less wide of the mark than it has hitherto been.

VI

A WORD MORE ABOUT TRUTH

[Footnote: Reprint from the Journal of Philosophy, July 18,1907.]

My failure in making converts to my conception of truth seems, if I
may judge by what I hear in conversation, almost complete. An ordinary
philosopher would feel disheartened, and a common choleric sinner would
curse God and die, after such a reception. But instead of taking counsel
of despair, I make bold to vary my statements, in the faint hope that
repeated droppings may wear upon the stone, and that my formulas may
seem less obscure if surrounded by something more of a 'mass' whereby to
apperceive them.

For fear of compromising other pragmatists, whoe'er they be, I will
speak of the conception which I am trying to make intelligible, as my
own conception. I first published it in the year 1885, in the first
article reprinted in the present book. Essential theses of this article
were independently supported in 1893 and 1895 by Professor D. S. Miller
[Footnote: Philosophical Review, vol. ii, p. 408, and Psychological
Review, vol. ii, p. 533.] and were repeated by me in a presidential
address on 'The knowing of things together' [Footnote: The relevant
parts of which are printed above, p. 43.] in 1895. Professor Strong,
in an article in the Journal of Philosophy, etc., [Footnote: Vol. i,
p. 253.] entitled 'A naturalistic theory of the reference of thought
to reality,' called our account 'the James-Miller theory of cognition,'
and, as I understood him, gave it his adhesion. Yet, such is the
difficulty of writing clearly in these penetralia of philosophy, that
each of these revered colleagues informs me privately that the account
of truth I now give--which to me is but that earlier statement more
completely set forth--is to him inadequate, and seems to leave the gist
of real cognition out. If such near friends disagree, what can I hope
from remoter ones, and what from unfriendly critics?