This something is the MAN'S OBJECT, primarily. Since the only realities
we can talk about are such OBJECTS-BELIEVED-IN, the pragmatist, whenever
he says 'reality,' means in the first instance what may count for the
man himself as a reality, what he believes at the moment to be such.
Sometimes the reality is a concrete sensible presence. The idea, for
example, may be that a certain door opens into a room where a glass of
beer may be bought. If opening the door leads to the actual sight and
taste of the beer, the man calls the idea true. Or his idea may be
that of an abstract relation, say of that between the sides and the
hypothenuse of a triangle, such a relation being, of course, a reality
quite as much as a glass of beer is. If the thought of such a relation
leads him to draw auxiliary lines and to compare the figures they make,
he may at last, perceiving one equality after another, SEE the relation
thought of, by a vision quite as particular and direct as was the taste
of the beer. If he does so, he calls THAT idea, also, true. His idea
has, in each case, brought him into closer touch with a reality felt at
the moment to verify just that idea. Each reality verifies and validates
its own idea exclusively; and in each case the verification consists in
the satisfactorily-ending consequences, mental or physical, which
the idea was able to set up. These 'workings' differ in every single
instance, they never transcend experience, they consist of particulars,
mental or sensible, and they admit of concrete description in every
individual case. Pragmatists are unable to see what you can possibly
MEAN by calling an idea true, unless you mean that between it as a
terminus a quo in some one's mind and some particular reality as a
terminus ad quem, such concrete workings do or may intervene. Their
direction constitutes the idea's reference to that reality, their
satisfactoriness constitutes its adaptation thereto, and the two things
together constitute the 'truth' of the idea for its possessor.
Without such intermediating portions of concretely real experience the
pragmatist sees no materials out of which the adaptive relation called
truth can be built up.

The anti-pragmatist view is that the workings are but evidences of the
truth's previous inherent presence in the idea, and that you can wipe
the very possibility of them out of existence and still leave the truth
of the idea as solid as ever. But surely this is not a counter-theory
of truth to ours. It is the renunciation of all articulate theory. It is
but a claim to the right to call certain ideas true anyhow; and this is
what I meant above by saying that the anti-pragmatists offer us no real
alternative, and that our account is literally the only positive theory
extant. What meaning, indeed, can an idea's truth have save its power of
adapting us either mentally or physically to a reality?