The transcendentalist believes his ideas to be self-transcendent only
because he finds that in fact they do bear fruits. Why need he quarrel
with an account of knowledge that insists on naming this effect? Why not
treat the working of the idea from next to next as the essence of its
self-transcendency? Why insist that knowing is a static relation out of
time when it practically seems so much a function of our active life?
For a thing to be valid, says Lotze, is the same as to make itself
valid. When the whole universe seems only to be making itself valid and
to be still incomplete (else why its ceaseless changing?) why, of all
things, should knowing be exempt? Why should it not be making itself
valid like everything else? That some parts of it may be already valid
or verified beyond dispute; the empirical philosopher, of course, like
any one else, may always hope.

V

THE ESSENCE OF HUMANISM

[Footnote: Reprinted from the Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and
Scientific Methods, vol. ii. No. 5, March 2, 1905.]

Humanism is a ferment that has 'come to stay.' It is not a single
hypothesis or theorem, and it dwells on no new facts. It is rather a
slow shifting in the philosophic perspective, making things appear
as from a new centre of interest or point of sight. Some writers are
strongly conscious of the shifting, others half unconscious, even though
their own vision may have undergone much change. The result is no small
confusion in debate, the half-conscious humanists often taking part
against the radical ones, as if they wished to count upon the other
side. [Footnote: Professor Baldwin, for example. His address 'Selective
Thinking' (Psychological Review, January, 1898, reprinted in his volume,
'Development and Evolution') seems to me an unusually well written
pragmatic manifesto. Nevertheless in 'The Limits of Pragmatism' (ibid;
January, 1904), he (much less clearly) joins in the attack.]

If humanism really be the name for such a shifting of perspective, it
is obvious that the whole scene of the philosophic stage will change
in some degree if humanism prevails. The emphasis of things, their
foreground and background distribution, their sizes and values, will not
keep just the same. [Footnote: The ethical changes, it seems to me, are
beautifully made evident in Professor Dewey's series of articles, which
will never get the attention they deserve till they are printed in a
book. I mean: 'The Significance of Emotions,' Psychological Review,
vol. ii, 13; 'The Reflex Arc Concept in Psychology,' ibid; iii, 357;
'Psychology and Social Practice,' ibid., vii, 105; 'Interpretation
of Savage Mind,' ibid; ix, 2l7; 'Green's Theory of the Moral Motive,'
Philosophical Review, vol. i, 593; 'Self-realization as the Moral
Ideal,' ibid; ii, 652; 'The Psychology of Effort,' ibid; vi, 43;
'The Evolutionary Method as Applied to Morality,' ibid; xi, 107,353;
'Evolution and Ethics,' Monist, vol. viii, 321; to mention only a few.]
If such pervasive consequences be involved in humanism, it is clear that
no pains which philosophers may take, first in defining it, and then in
furthering, checking, or steering its progress, will be thrown away.