Are they not all mere matters of CONSISTENCY--and emphatically NOT of
consistency between an absolute reality and the mind's copies of it,
but of actually felt consistency among judgments, objects, and habits of
reacting, in the mind's own experienceable world? And are not both our
need of such consistency and our pleasure in it conceivable as
outcomes of the natural fact that we are beings that do develop mental
HABITS--habit itself proving adaptively beneficial in an environment
where the same objects, or the same kinds of objects, recur and follow
'law'? If this were so, what would have come first would have been the
collateral profits of habit as such, and the theoretic life would have
grown up in aid of these. In point of fact, this seems to have been the
probable case. At life's origin, any present perception may have been
'true'--if such a word could then be applicable. Later, when reactions
became organized, the reactions became 'true' whenever expectation was
fulfilled by them. Otherwise they were 'false' or 'mistaken' reactions.
But the same class of objects needs the same kind of reaction, so the
impulse to react consistently must gradually have been established, and
a disappointment felt whenever the results frustrated expectation.
Here is a perfectly plausible germ for all our higher consistencies.
Nowadays, if an object claims from us a reaction of the kind habitually
accorded only to the opposite class of objects, our mental machinery
refuses to run smoothly. The situation is intellectually unsatisfactory.

Theoretic truth thus falls WITHIN the mind, being the accord of some
of its processes and objects with other processes and objects--'accord'
consisting here in well-definable relations. So long as the satisfaction
of feeling such an accord is denied us, whatever collateral profits
may seem to inure from what we believe in are but as dust in the
balance--provided always that we are highly organized intellectually,
which the majority of us are not. The amount of accord which satisfies
most men and women is merely the absence of violent clash between
their usual thoughts and statements and the limited sphere of
sense-perceptions in which their lives are cast. The theoretic truth
that most of us think we 'ought' to attain to is thus the possession of
a set of predicates that do not explicitly contradict their subjects.
We preserve it as often as not by leaving other predicates and subjects
out.

In some men theory is a passion, just as music is in others. The form
of inner consistency is pursued far beyond the line at which collateral
profits stop. Such men systematize and classify and schematize and
make synoptical tables and invent ideal objects for the pure love of
unifying. Too often the results, glowing with 'truth' for the inventors,
seem pathetically personal and artificial to bystanders. Which is as
much as to say that the purely theoretic criterion of truth can leave us
in the lurch as easily as any other criterion, and that the absolutists,
for all their pretensions, are 'in the same boat' concretely with those
whom they attack.

I am well aware that this paper has been rambling in the extreme. But
the whole subject is inductive, and sharp logic is hardly yet in order.
My great trammel has been the non-existence of any definitely stated
alternative on my opponents' part. It may conduce to clearness if I
recapitulate, in closing, what I conceive the main points of humanism to
be. They are these:--

1. An experience, perceptual or conceptual, must conform to reality in
order to be true.