Such an objection makes a curious muddle of the pragmatist's universe
of discourse. Within that universe the pragmatist finds some one with
a headache or other feeling, and some one else who postulates that
feeling. Asking on what condition the postulate is 'true' the pragmatist
replies that, for the postulator at any rate, it is true just
in proportion as to believe in it works in him the fuller sum of
satisfactions. What is it that is satisfactory here? Surely to BELIEVE
in the postulated object, namely, in the really existing feeling of
the other man. But how (especially if the postulator were himself a
thoroughgoing pragmatist) could it ever be satisfactory to him NOT
to believe in that feeling, so long as, in Professor Stout's words,
disbelief 'made the world seem to him cold, dull, and heartless'?
Disbelief would seem, on pragmatist principles, quite out of the
question under such conditions, unless the heartlessness of the world
were made probable already on other grounds. And since the belief in the
headache, true for the subject assumed in the pragmatist's universe of
discourse, is also true for the pragmatist who for his epitemologizing
purposes has assumed that entire universe, why is it not true in that
universe absolutely? The headache believed in is a reality there, and no
extant mind disbelieves it, neither the critic's mind nor his subject's!
Have our opponents any better brand of truth in this real universe of
ours that they can show us? [Footnote: I see here a chance to forestall
a criticism which some one may make on Lecture III of my Pragmatism,
where, on pp. 96-100, I said that 'God' and 'Matter' might be regarded
as synonymous terms, so long as no differing future consequences were
deducible from the two conceptions. The passage was transcribed from my
address at the California Philosophical Union, reprinted in the Journal
of Philosophy, vol. i, p. 673. I had no sooner given the address than
I perceived a flaw in that part of it; but I have left the passage
unaltered ever since, because the flaw did not spoil its illustrative
value. The flaw was evident when, as a case analogous to that of a
godless universe, I thought of what I called an 'automatic sweetheart,'
meaning a soulless body which should be absolutely indistinguishable
from a spiritually animated maiden, laughing, talking, blushing, nursing
us, and performing all feminine offices as tactfully and sweetly as if
a soul were in her. Would any one regard her as a full equivalent?
Certainly not, and why? Because, framed as we are, our egoism craves
above all things inward sympathy and recognition, love and admiration.
The outward treatment is valued mainly as an expression, as a
manifestation of the accompanying consciousness believed in.
Pragmatically, then, belief in the automatic sweetheart would not work,
and is point of fact no one treats it as a serious hypothesis. The
godless universe would be exactly similar. Even if matter could do
every outward thing that God does, the idea of it would not work as
satisfactorily, because the chief call for a God on modern men's part
is for a being who will inwardly recognize them and judge them
sympathetically. Matter disappoints this craving of our ego, so God
remains for most men the truer hypothesis, and indeed remains so for
definite pragmatic reasons.]

So much for the third misunderstanding, which is but one specification
of the following still wider one.

FOURTH MISUNDERSTANDING: NO PRAGMATIST CAN BE A REALIST IN HIS
EPISTEMOLOGY.