But when the pragmatist speaks of opinions, does he mean any such
insulated and unmotived abstractions as are here supposed? Of course
not, he means men's opinions in the flesh, as they have really formed
themselves, opinions surrounded by their causes and the influences
they obey and exert, and along with the whole environment of social
communication of which they are a part and out of which they take
their rise. Moreover the 'experience' which the pragmatic definition
postulates is the independent something which the anti-pragmatist
accuses him of ignoring. Already have men grown unanimous in the opinion
that such experience is of an independent reality, the existence of
which all opinions must acknowledge, in order to be true. Already do
they agree that in the long run it is useless to resist experience's
pressure; that the more of it a man has, the better position he stands
in, in respect of truth; that some men, having had more experience, are
therefore better authorities than others; that some are also wiser by
nature and better able to interpret the experience they have had; that
it is one part of such wisdom to compare notes, discuss, and follow the
opinion of our betters; and that the more systematically and thoroughly
such comparison and weighing of opinions is pursued, the truer the
opinions that survive are likely to be. When the pragmatist talks
of opinions, it is opinions as they thus concretely and livingly and
interactingly and correlatively exist that he has in mind; and when the
anti-pragmatist tries to floor him because the word 'opinion' can also
be taken abstractly and as if it had no environment, he simply ignores
the soil out of which the whole discussion grows. His weapons cut
the air and strike no blow. No one gets wounded in the war against
caricatures of belief and skeletons of opinion of which the German
onslaughts upon 'relativismus' consists. Refuse to use the word
'opinion' abstractly, keep it in its real environment, and the withers
of pragmatism remain unwrung. That men do exist who are 'opinionated,'
in the sense that their opinions are self-willed, is unfortunately a
fact that must be admitted, no matter what one's notion of truth in
general may be. But that this fact should make it impossible for truth
to form itself authentically out of the life of opinion is what no
critic has yet proved. Truth may well consist of certain opinions, and
does indeed consist of nothing but opinions, tho not every opinion need
be true. No pragmatist needs to dogmatize about the consensus of opinion
in the future being right--he need only postulate that it will probably
contain more of truth than any one's opinion now.

XIV

TWO ENGLISH CRITICS