5. That of RESEMBLING it, and eventually AFFECTING it, as determining
the pointing to IT and not to something else.

6. The elimination of the 'epistemological gulf,' so that the whole
truth-relation falls inside of the continuities of concrete experience,
and is constituted of particular processes, varying with every object
and subject, and susceptible of being described in detail.

The defects in this earlier account are:--

1. The possibly undue prominence given to resembling, which altho a
fundamental function in knowing truly, is so often dispensed with;

2. The undue emphasis laid upon operating on the object itself, which in
many cases is indeed decisive of that being what we refer to, but which
is often lacking, or replaced by operations on other things related to
the object.

3. The imperfect development of the generalized notion of the
WORKABILITY of the feeling or idea as equivalent to that SATISFACTORY
ADAPTATION to the particular reality, which constitutes the truth of
the idea. It is this more generalized notion, as covering all such
specifications as pointing, fitting, operating or resembling, that
distinguishes the developed view of Dewey, Schiller, and myself.

4. The treatment, [earlier], of percepts as the only realm of reality. I
now treat concepts as a co-ordinate realm.

The next paper represents a somewhat broader grasp of the topic on the
writer's part.

II

THE TIGERS IN INDIA [Footnote: Extracts from a presidential address
before the American Psychological Association, published in the
Psychological Review, vol. ii, p. 105 (1895).]

THERE are two ways of knowing things, knowing them immediately or
intuitively, and knowing them conceptually or representatively. Altho
such things as the white paper before our eyes can be known intuitively,
most of the things we know, the tigers now in India, for example, or
the scholastic system of philosophy, are known only representatively or
symbolically.

Suppose, to fix our ideas, that we take first a case of conceptual
knowledge; and let it be our knowledge of the tigers in India, as we sit
here. Exactly what do we MEAN by saying that we here know the tigers?
What is the precise fact that the cognition so confidently claimed is
KNOWN-AS, to use Shadworth Hodgson's inelegant but valuable form of
words?

Most men would answer that what we mean by knowing the tigers is having
them, however absent in body, become in some way present to our thought;
or that our knowledge of them is known as presence of our thought to
them. A great mystery is usually made of this peculiar presence in
absence; and the scholastic philosophy, which is only common sense
grown pedantic, would explain it as a peculiar kind of existence, called
INTENTIONAL EXISTENCE of the tigers in our mind. At the very least,
people would say that what we mean by knowing the tigers is mentally
POINTING towards them as we sit here.

But now what do we mean by POINTING, in such a case as this? What is the
pointing known-as, here?