It is to be doubted whether any theorizer to-day, either in mathematics,
logic, physics or biology, conceives himself to be literally re-editing
processes of nature or thoughts of God. The main forms of our thinking,
the separation of subjects from predicates, the negative, hypothetic
and disjunctive judgments, are purely human habits. The ether, as Lord
Salisbury said, is only a noun for the verb to undulate; and many of our
theological ideas are admitted, even by those who call them 'true,' to
be humanistic in like degree.

I fancy that these changes in the current notions of truth are what
originally gave the impulse to Messrs. Dewey's and Schiller's views.
The suspicion is in the air nowadays that the superiority of one of
our formulas to another may not consist so much in its literal
'objectivity,' as in subjective qualities like its usefulness, its
'elegance' or its congruity with our residual beliefs. Yielding to these
suspicions, and generalizing, we fall into something like the humanistic
state of mind. Truth we conceive to mean everywhere, not duplication,
but addition; not the constructing of inner copies of already complete
realities, but rather the collaborating with realities so as to bring
about a clearer result. Obviously this state of mind is at first full of
vagueness and ambiguity. 'Collaborating' is a vague term; it must at
any rate cover conceptions and logical arrangements. 'Clearer' is vaguer
still. Truth must bring clear thoughts, as well as clear the way to
action. 'Reality' is the vaguest term of all. The only way to test such
a programme at all is to apply it to the various types of truth, in the
hope of reaching an account that shall be more precise. Any hypothesis
that forces such a review upon one has one great merit, even if in
the end it prove invalid: it gets us better acquainted with the total
subject. To give the theory plenty of 'rope' and see if it hangs itself
eventually is better tactics than to choke it off at the outset by
abstract accusations of self-contradiction. I think therefore that
a decided effort at sympathetic mental play with humanism is the
provisional attitude to be recommended to the reader.

When I find myself playing sympathetically with humanism, something like
what follows is what I end by conceiving it to mean.