I have already said something about this misconception under the third
and fourth heads, above, but a little more may be helpful. The objection
is apt to clothe itself in words like these: 'You make truth to consist
in every value except the cognitive value proper; you always leave your
knower at many removes (or, at the uttermost, at one remove) from his
real object; the best you do is to let his ideas carry him towards it;
it remains forever outside of him,' etc.

I think that the leaven working here is the rooted intellectualist
persuasion that, to know a reality, an idea must in some inscrutable
fashion possess or be it. [Footnote: Sensations may, indeed, possess
their objects or coalesce with them, as common sense supposes that they
do; and intuited differences between concepts may coalesce with the
'eternal' objective differences; but to simplify our discussion. here
we can afford to abstract from these very special cases of knowing.]
For pragmatism this kind of coalescence is inessential. As a rule our
cognitions are only processes of mind off their balance and in motion
towards real termini; and the reality of the termini, believed in by the
states of mind in question, can be guaranteed only by some wider knower
[Footnote: The transcendental idealist thinks that, in some inexplicable
way, the finite states of mind are identical with the transfinite
all-knower which he finds himself obliged to postulate in order to
supply a fundamentum far the relation of knowing, as he apprehends it.
Pragmatists can leave the question of identity open; but they cannot do
without the wider knower any more than they can do without the reality,
if they want to prove a case of knowing. They themselves play the part
of the absolute knower for the universe of discourse which serves them
as material for epistemologizing. They warrant the reality there,
and the subject's true knowledge, there, of it. But whether what they
themselves say about that whole universe is objectively true, i.e.,
whether the pragmatic theory of truth is true really, they cannot
warrant,--they can only believe it To their hearers they can only
propose it, as I propose it to my readers, as something to be verified
ambulando, or by the way is which its consequences may confirm it]. But
if there is no reason extant in the universe why they should be doubted,
the beliefs are true in the only sense in which anything can be true
anyhow: they are practically and concretely true, namely. True in the
mystical mongrel sense of an Identitatsphilosophie they need not be; nor
is there any intelligible reason why they ever need be true otherwise
than verifiably and practically. It is reality's part to possess its
own existence; it is thought's part to get into 'touch' with it by
innumerable paths of verification.