To be helped to anticipate consequences is always a gain, and such being
the help that abstract concepts give us, it is obvious that their use is
fulfilled only when we get back again into concrete particulars by their
means, bearing the consequences in our minds, and enriching our notion
of the original objects therewithal.

Without abstract concepts to handle our perceptual particulars by,
we are like men hopping on one foot. Using concepts along with the
particulars, we become bipedal. We throw our concept forward, get
a foothold on the consequence, hitch our line to this, and draw our
percept up, travelling thus with a hop, skip and jump over the surface
of life at a vastly rapider rate than if we merely waded through the
thickness of the particulars as accident rained them down upon our
heads. Animals have to do this, but men raise their heads higher and
breathe freely in the upper conceptual air.

The enormous esteem professed by all philosophers for the
conceptual form of consciousness is easy to understand. From Plato's
time downwards it has been held to be our sole avenue to essential
truth. Concepts are universal, changeless, pure; their relations are
eternal; they are spiritual, while the concrete particulars which they
enable us to handle are corrupted by the flesh. They are precious in
themselves, then, apart from their original use, and confer new dignity
upon our life.

One can find no fault with this way of feeling about concepts so long as
their original function does not get swallowed up in the admiration
and lost. That function is of course to enlarge mentally our momentary
experiences by ADDING to them the consequences conceived; but
unfortunately, that function is not only too often forgotten by
philosophers in their reasonings, but is often converted into its exact
opposite, and made a means of diminishing the original experience
by DENYING (implicitly or explicitly) all its features save the one
specially abstracted to conceive it by.

This itself is a highly abstract way of stating my complaint, and it
needs to be redeemed from obscurity by showing instances of what is
meant. Some beliefs very dear to my own heart have been conceived in
this viciously abstract way by critics. One is the 'will to believe,' so
called; another is the indeterminism of certain futures; a third is the
notion that truth may vary with the standpoint of the man who holds it.
I believe that the perverse abuse of the abstracting function has led
critics to employ false arguments against these doctrines, and often has
led their readers to false conclusions. I should like to try to save the
situation, if possible, by a few counter-critical remarks.