He asserts that, for a pragmatist, truth cannot be a relation between
an idea and a reality outside and transcendent of the idea, but must
lie 'altogether within experience,' where it will need 'no reference to
anything else to justify it'--no reference to the object, apparently.
The pragmatist must 'reduce everything to psychology,' aye, and to the
psychology of the immediate moment. He is consequently debarred from
saying that an idea that eventually gets psychologically verified WAS
already true before the process of verifying was complete; and he is
equally debarred from treating an idea as true provisionally so long as
he only believes that he CAN verify it whenever he will.

Whether such a pragmatist as this exists, I know not, never having
myself met with the beast. We can define terms as we like; and if that
be my friend Pratt's definition of a pragmatist, I can only concur with
his anti-pragmatism. But, in setting up the weird type, he quotes words
from me; so, in order to escape being classed by some reader along with
so asinine a being, I will reassert my own view of truth once more.

Truth is essentially a relation between two things, an idea, on the one
hand, and a reality outside of the idea, on the other. This relation,
like all relations, has its fundamentum, namely, the matrix of
experiential circumstance, psychological as well as physical, in which
the correlated terms are found embedded. In the case of the relation
between 'heir' and 'legacy' the fundamentum is a world in which there
was a testator, and in which there is now a will and an executor; in the
case of that between idea and object, it is a world with circumstances
of a sort to make a satisfactory verification process, lying around
and between the two terms. But just as a man may be called an heir and
treated as one before the executor has divided the estate, so an idea
may practically be credited with truth before the verification process
has been exhaustively carried out--the existence of the mass of
verifying circumstance is enough. Where potentiality counts for
actuality in so many other cases, one does not see why it may not so
count here. We call a man benevolent not only for his kind acts paid in,
but for his readiness to perform others; we treat an idea as 'luminous'
not only for the light it has shed, but for that we expect it will
shed on dark problems. Why should we not equally trust the truth of our
ideas? We live on credits everywhere; and we use our ideas far oftener
for calling up things connected with their immediate objects, than for
calling up those objects themselves. Ninety-nine times out of a hundred
the only use we should make of the object itself, if we were led up to
it by our idea, would be to pass on to those connected things by its
means. So we continually curtail verification-processes, letting our
belief that they are possible suffice.