Some readers will say that, altho I may possibly believe in realities
beyond our ideas Dr. Schiller, at any rate, does not. This is a great
misunderstanding, for Schiller's doctrine and mine are identical,
only our exposition follow different directions. He starts from the
subjective pole of the chain, the individual with his beliefs, as the
more concrete and immediately given phenomenon. 'An individual claims
his belief to be true,' Schiller says, 'but what does he mean by true?
and how does he establish the claim?' With these questions we embark
on a psychological inquiry. To be true, it appears, means, FOR THAT
INDIVIDUAL, to work satisfactorily for him; and the working and the
satisfaction, since they vary from case to case, admit of no universal
description. What works is true and represents a reality, for the
individual for whom it works. If he is infallible, the reality is
'really' there; if mistaken it is not there, or not there as he thinks
it. We all believe, when our ideas work satisfactorily; but we don't yet
know who of us is infallible; so that the problem of truth and that of
error are EBENBURTIG and arise out of the same situations. Schiller,
remaining with the fallible individual, and treating only
of reality-for-him, seems to many of his readers to ignore
reality-in-itself altogether. But that is because he seeks only to tell
us how truths are attained, not what the content of those truths, when
attained, shall be. It may be that the truest of all beliefs shall be
that in transsubjective realities. It certainly SEEMS the truest for
no rival belief is as voluminously satisfactory, and it is probably
Dr. Schiller's own belief; but he is not required, for his immediate
purpose, to profess it. Still less is he obliged to assume it in advance
as the basis of his discussion.

I, however, warned by the ways of critics, adopt different tactics. I
start from the object-pole of the idea-reality chain and follow it in
the opposite direction from Schiller's. Anticipating the results of the
general truth-processes of mankind, I begin with the abstract notion
of an objective reality. I postulate it, and ask on my own account, I
VOUCHING FOR THIS REALITY, what would make any one else's idea of it
true for me as well as for him. But I find no different answer from that
which Schiller gives. If the other man's idea leads him, not only
to believe that the reality is there, but to use it as the reality's
temporary substitute, by letting it evoke adaptive thoughts and acts
similar to those which the reality itself would provoke, then it is
true in the only intelligible sense, true through its particular
consequences, and true for me as well as for the man.

My account is more of a logical definition; Schiller's is more of a
psychological description. Both treat an absolutely identical matter of
experience, only they traverse it in opposite ways.

Possibly these explanations may satisfy M. Hebert, whose little
book, apart from the false accusation of subjectivism, gives a fairly
instructive account of the pragmatist epistemology.

XIII

ABSTRACTIONISM AND 'RELATIVISMUS'

Abstract concepts, such as elasticity, voluminousness, disconnectedness,
are salient aspects of our concrete experiences which we find it useful
to single out. Useful, because we are then reminded of other things
that offer those same aspects; and, if the aspects carry consequences in
those other things, we can return to our first things, expecting those
same consequences to accrue.