How comes it, then, that our critics so uniformly accuse us of
subjectivism, of denying the reality's existence? It comes, I think,
from the necessary predominance of subjective language in our analysis.
However independent and elective realities may be, we can talk about
them, in framing our accounts of truth, only as so many objects
believed-in. But the process of experience leads men so continually
to supersede their older objects by newer ones which they find it more
satisfactory to believe in, that the notion of an ABSOLUTE reality
inevitably arises as a grenzbegriff, equivalent to that of an object
that shall never be superseded, and belief in which shall be endgueltig.
Cognitively we thus live under a sort of rule of three: as our private
concepts represent the sense-objects to which they lead us, these being
public realities independent of the individual, so these sense-realities
may, in turn, represent realities of a hypersensible order, electrons,
mind-stuff. God, or what not, existing independently of all human
thinkers. The notion of such final realities, knowledge of which would
be absolute truth, is an outgrowth of our cognitive experience from
which neither pragmatists nor anti-pragmatists escape. They form an
inevitable regulative postulate in every one's thinking. Our notion of
them is the most abundantly suggested and satisfied of all our beliefs,
the last to suffer doubt. The difference is that our critics use this
belief as their sole paradigm, and treat any one who talks of
human realities as if he thought the notion of reality 'in itself'
illegitimate. Meanwhile, reality-in-itself, so far as by them TALKED OF,
is only a human object; they postulate it just as we postulate it; and
if we are subjectivists they are so no less. Realities in themselves
can be there FOR any one, whether pragmatist or anti-pragmatist, only by
being believed; they are believed only by their notions appearing true;
and their notions appear true only because they work satisfactorily.
Satisfactorily, moreover, for the particular thinker's purpose. There is
no idea which is THE true idea, of anything. Whose is THE true idea of
the absolute? Or to take M. Hebert's example, what is THE true idea of a
picture which you possess? It is the idea that most satisfactorily meets
your present interest. The interest may be in the picture's place, its
age, its 'tone,' its subject, its dimensions, its authorship, its price,
its merit, or what not. If its authorship by Corot have been doubted,
what will satisfy the interest aroused in you at that moment will be
to have your claim to own a Corot confirmed; but, if you have a normal
human mind, merely calling it a Corot will not satisfy other demands of
your mind at the same time. For THEM to be satisfied, what you learn of
the picture must make smooth connection with what you know of the rest
of the system of reality in which the actual Corot played his part.
M. Hebert accuses us of holding that the proprietary satisfactions of
themselves suffice to make the belief true, and that, so far as we are
concerned, no actual Corot need ever have existed. Why we should be thus
cut off from the more general and intellectual satisfactions, I know
not; but whatever the satisfactions may be, intellectual or proprietary,
they belong to the subjective side of the truth-relation. They found our
beliefs; our beliefs are in realities; if no realities are there, the
beliefs are false but if realities are there, how they can even be KNOWN
without first being BELIEVED; or how BELIEVED except by our first having
ideas of them that work satisfactorily, pragmatists find it impossible
to imagine. They also find it impossible to imagine what makes the
anti-pragmatists' dogmatic 'ipse dixit' assurance of reality
more credible than the pragmatists conviction based on concrete
verifications. M. Hebert will probably agree to this, when put in
this way, so I do not see our inferiority to him in the matter of
connaissance proprement dite.