To this question I shall have to give a very prosaic answer--one
that traverses the pre-possessions not only of common sense and
scholasticism, but also those of nearly all the epistemological writers
whom I have ever read. The answer, made brief, is this: The pointing of
our thought to the tigers is known simply and solely as a procession of
mental associates and motor consequences that follow on the thought, and
that would lead harmoniously, if followed out, into some ideal or real
context, or even into the immediate presence, of the tigers. It is known
as our rejection of a jaguar, if that beast were shown us as a tiger; as
our assent to a genuine tiger if so shown. It is known as our ability
to utter all sorts of propositions which don't contradict other
propositions that are true of the real tigers. It is even known, if we
take the tigers very seriously, as actions of ours which may terminate
in directly intuited tigers, as they would if we took a voyage to India
for the purpose of tiger-hunting and brought back a lot of skins of
the striped rascals which we had laid low. In all this there is no
self-transcendency in our mental images TAKEN BY THEMSELVES. They are
one phenomenal fact; the tigers are another; and their pointing to the
tigers is a perfectly commonplace intra-experiential relation, IF YOU
ONCE GRANT A CONNECTING WORLD TO BE THERE. In short, the ideas and the
tigers are in themselves as loose and separate, to use Hume's language,
as any two things can be; and pointing means here an operation as
external and adventitious as any that nature yields.[Footnote: A
stone in one field may 'fit,' we say, a hole in another field. But the
relation of 'fitting,' so long as no one carries the stone to the hole
and drops it in, is only one name for the fact that such an act MAY
happen. Similarly with the knowing of the tigers here and now. It is
only an anticipatory name for a further associative and terminative
process that MAY occur.]

I hope you may agree with me now that in representative knowledge there
is no special inner mystery, but only an outer chain of physical or
mental intermediaries connecting thought and thing. TO KNOW AN OBJECT IS
HERE TO LEAD TO IT THROUGH A CONTEXT WHICH THE WORLD SUPPLIES. All this
was most instructively set forth by our colleague D. S. Miller at our
meeting in New York last Christmas, and for re-confirming my sometime
wavering opinion, I owe him this acknowledgment. [Footnote: See Dr.
Miller's articles on Truth and Error, and on Content and Function, in
the Philosophical Review, July, 1893, and Nov., 1895.]