This notion of a FIRST in the shape of a most chaotic pure experience
which sets us questions, of a SECOND in the way of fundamental
categories, long ago wrought into the structure of our consciousness and
practically irreversible, which define the general frame within which
answers must fall, and of a THIRD which gives the detail of the answers
in the shapes most congruous with all our present needs, is, as I take
it, the essence of the humanistic conception. It represents experience
in its pristine purity to be now so enveloped in predicates historically
worked out that we can think of it as little more than an OTHER, of
a THAT, which the mind, in Mr. Bradley's phrase, 'encounters,' and to
whose stimulating presence we respond by ways of thinking which we
call 'true' in proportion as they facilitate our mental or physical
activities and bring us outer power and inner peace. But whether the
Other, the universal THAT, has itself any definite inner structure, or
whether, if it have any, the structure resembles any of our predicated
WHATS, this is a question which humanism leaves untouched. For us, at
any rate, it insists, reality is an accumulation of our own intellectual
inventions, and the struggle for 'truth' in our progressive dealings
with it is always a struggle to work in new nouns and adjectives while
altering as little as possible the old.

It is hard to see why either Mr. Bradley's own logic or his
metaphysics should oblige him to quarrel with this conception. He might
consistently adopt it verbatim et literatim, if he would, and simply
throw his peculiar absolute round it, following in this the good example
of Professor Royce. Bergson in France, and his disciples, Wilbois the
physicist and Leroy, are thoroughgoing humanists in the sense defined.
Professor Milhaud also appears to be one; and the great Poincare misses
it by only the breadth of a hair. In Germany the name of Simmel offers
itself as that of a humanist of the most radical sort. Mach and his
school, and Hertz and Ostwald must be classed as humanists. The view is
in the atmosphere and must be patiently discussed.

The best way to discuss it would be to see what the alternative
might be. What is it indeed? Its critics make no explicit statement,
Professor Royce being the only one so far who has formulated anything
definite. The first service of humanism to philosophy accordingly seems
to be that it will probably oblige those who dislike it to search their
own hearts and heads. It will force analysis to the front and make
it the order of the day. At present the lazy tradition that truth is
adaequatio intellectus et rei seems all there is to contradict it with.
Mr. Bradley's only suggestion is that true thought 'must correspond to
a determinate being which it cannot be said to make,' and obviously that
sheds no new light. What is the meaning of the word to 'correspond'?
Where is the 'being'? What sort of things are 'determinations,' and what
is meant in this particular case by 'not to make'?