"The records of many more such cases lie before me [Mr. Swift goes on];
an encyclopedia might easily be filled with their kind. These few I cite
as an interpretation of the universe. 'We are aware of the presence of
God in His world,' says a writer in a recent English Review. [The very
presence of ill in the temporal order is the condition of the perfection
of the eternal order, writes Professor Royce ('The World and the
Individual,' II, 385).] 'The Absolute is the richer for every discord,
and for all diversity which it embraces,' says F. H. Bradley (Appearance
and Reality, 204). He means that these slain men make the universe
richer, and that is Philosophy. But while Professors Royce and Bradley
and a whole host of guileless thoroughfed thinkers are unveiling
Reality and the Absolute and explaining away evil and pain, this is the
condition of the only beings known to us anywhere in the universe with
a developed consciousness of what the universe is. What these people
experience IS Reality. It gives us an absolute phase of the universe. It
is the personal experience of those most qualified in all our circle
of knowledge to HAVE experience, to tell us WHAT is. Now, what does
THINKING ABOUT the experience of these persons come to compared with
directly, personally feeling it, as they feel it? The philosophers are
dealing in shades, while those who live and feel know truth. And the
mind of mankind-not yet the mind of philosophers and of the proprietary
class-but of the great mass of the silently thinking and feeling men,
is coming to this view. They are judging the universe as they have
heretofore permitted the hierophants of religion and learning to judge
THEM. ...

"This Cleveland workingman, killing his children and himself [another
of the cited cases], is one of the elemental, stupendous facts of this
modern world and of this universe. It cannot be glozed over or minimized
away by all the treatises on God, and Love, and Being, helplessly
existing in their haughty monumental vacuity. This is one of the simple
irreducible elements of this world's life after millions of years of
divine opportunity and twenty centuries of Christ. It is in the moral
world like atoms or sub-atoms in the physical, primary, indestructible.
And what it blazons to man is the ... imposture of all philosophy
which does not see in such events the consummate factor of conscious
experience. These facts invincibly prove religion a nullity. Man will
not give religion two thousand centuries or twenty centuries more to try
itself and waste human time; its time is up, its probation is ended.
Its own record ends it. Mankind has not sons and eternities to spare for
trying out discredited systems...." [Footnote: Morrison I. Swift, Human
Submission, Part Second, Philadelphia, Liberty Press, 1905, pp. 4-10.]