Philosophy and common life abound in similar instances. The
'sentimentalist fallacy' is to shed tears over abstract justice and
generosity, beauty, etc., and never to know these qualities when you
meet them in the street, because there the circumstances make them
vulgar. Thus I read in the privately printed biography of an eminently
rationalistic mind: "It was strange that with such admiration for beauty
in the abstract, my brother had no enthusiasm for fine architecture, for
beautiful painting, or for flowers." And in almost the last philosophic
work I have read, I find such passages as the following: "Justice
is ideal, solely ideal. Reason conceives that it ought to exist, but
experience shows that it can-not. ... Truth, which ought to be, cannot
be. ... Reason is deformed by experience. As soon as reason enters
experience, it becomes contrary to reason."

The rationalist's fallacy here is exactly like the sentimentalist's.
Both extract a quality from the muddy particulars of experience, and
find it so pure when extracted that they contrast it with each and all
its muddy instances as an opposite and higher nature. All the while it
is THEIR nature. It is the nature of truths to be validated, verified.
It pays for our ideas to be validated. Our obligation to seek truth is
part of our general obligation to do what pays. The payments true ideas
bring are the sole why of our duty to follow them.

Identical whys exist in the case of wealth and health. Truth makes no
other kind of claim and imposes no other kind of ought than health and
wealth do. All these claims are conditional; the concrete benefits we
gain are what we mean by calling the pursuit a duty. In the case of
truth, untrue beliefs work as perniciously in the long run as true
beliefs work beneficially. Talking abstractly, the quality 'true' may
thus be said to grow absolutely precious, and the quality 'untrue'
absolutely damnable: the one may be called good, the other bad,
unconditionally. We ought to think the true, we ought to shun the false,
imperatively.

But if we treat all this abstraction literally and oppose it to its
mother soil in experience, see what a preposterous position we work
ourselves into.

We cannot then take a step forward in our actual thinking. When shall
I acknowledge this truth and when that? Shall the acknowledgment be
loud?--or silent? If sometimes loud, sometimes silent, which NOW? When
may a truth go into cold-storage in the encyclopedia? and when shall it
come out for battle? Must I constantly be repeating the truth 'twice
two are four' because of its eternal claim on recognition? or is
it sometimes irrelevant? Must my thoughts dwell night and day on my
personal sins and blemishes, because I truly have them?--or may I sink
and ignore them in order to be a decent social unit, and not a mass of
morbid melancholy and apology?