Our minds thus grow in spots; and like grease-spots, the spots spread.
But we let them spread as little as possible: we keep unaltered as much
of our old knowledge, as many of our old prejudices and beliefs, as we
can. We patch and tinker more than we renew. The novelty soaks in; it
stains the ancient mass; but it is also tinged by what absorbs it. Our
past apperceives and co-operates; and in the new equilibrium in which
each step forward in the process of learning terminates, it happens
relatively seldom that the new fact is added RAW. More usually it is
embedded cooked, as one might say, or stewed down in the sauce of the
old.

New truths thus are resultants of new experiences and of old truths
combined and mutually modifying one another. And since this is the case
in the changes of opinion of to-day, there is no reason to assume that
it has not been so at all times. It follows that very ancient modes
of thought may have survived through all the later changes in men's
opinions. The most primitive ways of thinking may not yet be wholly
expunged. Like our five fingers, our ear-bones, our rudimentary caudal
appendage, or our other 'vestigial' peculiarities, they may remain as
indelible tokens of events in our race-history. Our ancestors may at
certain moments have struck into ways of thinking which they might
conceivably not have found. But once they did so, and after the fact,
the inheritance continues. When you begin a piece of music in a certain
key, you must keep the key to the end. You may alter your house ad
libitum, but the ground-plan of the first architect persists--you can
make great changes, but you cannot change a Gothic church into a Doric
temple. You may rinse and rinse the bottle, but you can't get the taste
of the medicine or whiskey that first filled it wholly out.

My thesis now is this, that OUR FUNDAMENTAL WAYS OF THINKING ABOUT
THINGS ARE DISCOVERIES OF EXCEEDINGLY REMOTE ANCESTORS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ABLE TO PRESERVE THEMSELVES THROUGHOUT THE EXPERIENCE OF ALL SUBSEQUENT
TIME. They form one great stage of equilibrium in the human mind's
development, the stage of common sense. Other stages have grafted
themselves upon this stage, but have never succeeded in displacing it.
Let us consider this common-sense stage first, as if it might be final.

In practical talk, a man's common sense means his good judgment, his
freedom from excentricity, his GUMPTION, to use the vernacular word. In
philosophy it means something entirely different, it means his use of
certain intellectual forms or categories of thought. Were we lobsters,
or bees, it might be that our organization would have led to our using
quite different modes from these of apprehending our experiences. It
MIGHT be too (we cannot dogmatically deny this) that such categories,
unimaginable by us to-day, would have proved on the whole as serviceable
for handling our experiences mentally as those which we actually use.