So we see concretely two types of religion in sharp contrast. Using our
old terms of comparison, we may say that the absolutistic scheme appeals
to the tender-minded while the pluralistic scheme appeals to the tough.
Many persons would refuse to call the pluralistic scheme religious at
all. They would call it moralistic, and would apply the word religious
to the monistic scheme alone. Religion in the sense of self-surrender,
and moralism in the sense of self-sufficingness, have been pitted
against each other as incompatibles frequently enough in the history of
human thought.

We stand here before the final question of philosophy. I said in my
fourth lecture that I believed the monistic-pluralistic alternative to
be the deepest and most pregnant question that our minds can frame. Can
it be that the disjunction is a final one? that only one side can be
true? Are a pluralism and monism genuine incompatibles? So that, if
the world were really pluralistically constituted, if it really existed
distributively and were made up of a lot of eaches, it could only be
saved piecemeal and de facto as the result of their behavior, and its
epic history in no wise short-circuited by some essential oneness in
which the severalness were already 'taken up' beforehand and eternally
'overcome'? If this were so, we should have to choose one philosophy or
the other. We could not say 'yes, yes' to both alternatives. There would
have to be a 'no' in our relations with the possible. We should confess
an ultimate disappointment: we could not remain healthy-minded and
sick-minded in one indivisible act.

Of course as human beings we can be healthy minds on one day and sick
souls on the next; and as amateur dabblers in philosophy we may
perhaps be allowed to call ourselves monistic pluralists, or free-will
determinists, or whatever else may occur to us of a reconciling kind.
But as philosophers aiming at clearness and consistency, and feeling the
pragmatistic need of squaring truth with truth, the question is forced
upon us of frankly adopting either the tender or the robustious type of
thought. In particular THIS query has always come home to me: May not
the claims of tender-mindedness go too far? May not the notion of a
world already saved in toto anyhow, be too saccharine to stand? May not
religious optimism be too idyllic? Must ALL be saved? Is NO price to be
paid in the work of salvation? Is the last word sweet? Is all 'yes,
yes' in the universe? Doesn't the fact of 'no' stand at the very core of
life? Doesn't the very 'seriousness' that we attribute to life mean that
ineluctable noes and losses form a part of it, that there are genuine
sacrifices somewhere, and that something permanently drastic and bitter
always remains at the bottom of its cup?