The universe is a system of which the individual members may relax their
anxieties occasionally, in which the don't-care mood is also right for
men, and moral holidays in order--that, if I mistake not, is part, at
least, of what the Absolute is 'known-as,' that is the great difference
in our particular experiences which his being true makes for us, that
is part of his cash-value when he is pragmatically interpreted. Farther
than that the ordinary lay-reader in philosophy who thinks favorably of
absolute idealism does not venture to sharpen his conceptions. He can
use the Absolute for so much, and so much is very precious. He is pained
at hearing you speak incredulously of the Absolute, therefore, and
disregards your criticisms because they deal with aspects of the
conception that he fails to follow.

If the Absolute means this, and means no more than this, who can
possibly deny the truth of it? To deny it would be to insist that men
should never relax, and that holidays are never in order. I am well
aware how odd it must seem to some of you to hear me say that an idea is
'true' so long as to believe it is profitable to our lives. That it is
GOOD, for as much as it profits, you will gladly admit. If what we do
by its aid is good, you will allow the idea itself to be good in so far
forth, for we are the better for possessing it. But is it not a strange
misuse of the word 'truth,' you will say, to call ideas also 'true' for
this reason?

To answer this difficulty fully is impossible at this stage of
my account. You touch here upon the very central point of Messrs.
Schiller's, Dewey's and my own doctrine of truth, which I cannot discuss
with detail until my sixth lecture. Let me now say only this, that truth
is ONE SPECIES OF GOOD, and not, as is usually supposed, a category
distinct from good, and co-ordinate with it. THE TRUE IS THE NAME OF
WHATEVER PROVES ITSELF TO BE GOOD IN THE WAY OF BELIEF, AND GOOD, TOO,
FOR DEFINITE, ASSIGNABLE REASONS. Surely you must admit this, that if
there were NO good for life in true ideas, or if the knowledge of them
were positively disadvantageous and false ideas the only useful ones,
then the current notion that truth is divine and precious, and its
pursuit a duty, could never have grown up or become a dogma. In a world
like that, our duty would be to SHUN truth, rather. But in this world,
just as certain foods are not only agreeable to our taste, but good for
our teeth, our stomach and our tissues; so certain ideas are not only
agreeable to think about, or agreeable as supporting other ideas that we
are fond of, but they are also helpful in life's practical struggles. If
there be any life that it is really better we should lead, and if there
be any idea which, if believed in, would help us to lead that life,
then it would be really BETTER FOR US to believe in that idea, UNLESS,
INDEED, BELIEF IN IT INCIDENTALLY CLASHED WITH OTHER GREATER VITAL
BENEFITS.