Far be it from me to deny the majesty of this conception, or its
capacity to yield religious comfort to a most respectable class of
minds. But from the human point of view, no one can pretend that it
doesn't suffer from the faults of remoteness and abstractness. It is
eminently a product of what I have ventured to call the rationalistic
temper. It disdains empiricism's needs. It substitutes a pallid outline
for the real world's richness. It is dapper; it is noble in the bad
sense, in the sense in which to be noble is to be inapt for humble
service. In this real world of sweat and dirt, it seems to me that
when a view of things is 'noble,' that ought to count as a presumption
against its truth, and as a philosophic disqualification. The prince of
darkness may be a gentleman, as we are told he is, but whatever the
God of earth and heaven is, he can surely be no gentleman. His menial
services are needed in the dust of our human trials, even more than his
dignity is needed in the empyrean.

Now pragmatism, devoted tho she be to facts, has no such materialistic
bias as ordinary empiricism labors under. Moreover, she has no objection
whatever to the realizing of abstractions, so long as you get about
among particulars with their aid and they actually carry you somewhere.
Interested in no conclusions but those which our minds and our
experiences work out together, she has no a priori prejudices against
theology. IF THEOLOGICAL IDEAS PROVE TO HAVE A VALUE FOR CONCRETE LIFE,
THEY WILL BE TRUE, FOR PRAGMATISM, IN THE SENSE OF BEING GOOD FOR SO
MUCH. FOR HOW MUCH MORE THEY ARE TRUE, WILL DEPEND ENTIRELY ON THEIR
RELATIONS TO THE OTHER TRUTHS THAT ALSO HAVE TO BE ACKNOWLEDGED.

What I said just now about the Absolute of transcendental idealism is a
case in point. First, I called it majestic and said it yielded religious
comfort to a class of minds, and then I accused it of remoteness and
sterility. But so far as it affords such comfort, it surely is not
sterile; it has that amount of value; it performs a concrete function.
As a good pragmatist, I myself ought to call the Absolute true 'in so
far forth,' then; and I unhesitatingly now do so.

But what does TRUE IN SO FAR FORTH mean in this case? To answer, we need
only apply the pragmatic method. What do believers in the Absolute mean
by saying that their belief affords them comfort? They mean that since
in the Absolute finite evil is 'overruled' already, we may, therefore,
whenever we wish, treat the temporal as if it were potentially the
eternal, be sure that we can trust its outcome, and, without sin,
dismiss our fear and drop the worry of our finite responsibility. In
short, they mean that we have a right ever and anon to take a moral
holiday, to let the world wag in its own way, feeling that its issues
are in better hands than ours and are none of our business.