"The evil will appear as almost nothing in comparison with the good, if
we once consider the real magnitude of the City of God. Coelius Secundus
Curio has written a little book, 'De Amplitudine Regni Coelestis,' which
was reprinted not long ago. But he failed to compass the extent of the
kingdom of the heavens. The ancients had small ideas of the works of
God. ... It seemed to them that only our earth had inhabitants, and even
the notion of our antipodes gave them pause. The rest of the world for
them consisted of some shining globes and a few crystalline spheres.
But to-day, whatever be the limits that we may grant or refuse to the
Universe we must recognize in it a countless number of globes, as big
as ours or bigger, which have just as much right as it has to support
rational inhabitants, tho it does not follow that these need all be men.
Our earth is only one among the six principal satellites of our sun. As
all the fixed stars are suns, one sees how small a place among visible
things our earth takes up, since it is only a satellite of one among
them. Now all these suns MAY be inhabited by none but happy creatures;
and nothing obliges us to believe that the number of damned persons is
very great; for a VERY FEW INSTANCES AND SAMPLES SUFFICE FOR THE UTILITY
WHICH GOOD DRAWS FROM EVIL. Moreover, since there is no reason to
suppose that there are stars everywhere, may there not be a great space
beyond the region of the stars? And this immense space, surrounding all
this region, ... may be replete with happiness and glory. ... What now
becomes of the consideration of our Earth and of its denizens? Does it
not dwindle to something incomparably less than a physical point, since
our Earth is but a point compared with the distance of the fixed stars.
Thus the part of the Universe which we know, being almost lost in
nothingness compared with that which is unknown to us, but which we
are yet obliged to admit; and all the evils that we know lying in this
almost-nothing; it follows that the evils may be almost-nothing in
comparison with the goods that the Universe contains."

Leibnitz continues elsewhere: "There is a kind of justice which aims
neither at the amendment of the criminal, nor at furnishing an example
to others, nor at the reparation of the injury. This justice is founded
in pure fitness, which finds a certain satisfaction in the expiation
of a wicked deed. The Socinians and Hobbes objected to this punitive
justice, which is properly vindictive justice and which God has reserved
for himself at many junctures. ... It is always founded in the fitness
of things, and satisfies not only the offended party, but all wise
lookers-on, even as beautiful music or a fine piece of architecture
satisfies a well-constituted mind. It is thus that the torments of the
damned continue, even tho they serve no longer to turn anyone away from
sin, and that the rewards of the blest continue, even tho they confirm
no one in good ways. The damned draw to themselves ever new penalties
by their continuing sins, and the blest attract ever fresh joys by their
unceasing progress in good. Both facts are founded on the principle of
fitness, ... for God has made all things harmonious in perfection as I
have already said."