Remember that no matter what nature may have produced or may be
producing, the means must necessarily have been adequate, must have been
FITTED TO THAT PRODUCTION. The argument from fitness to design would
consequently always apply, whatever were the product's character. The
recent Mont-Pelee eruption, for example, required all previous history
to produce that exact combination of ruined houses, human and animal
corpses, sunken ships, volcanic ashes, etc., in just that one hideous
configuration of positions. France had to be a nation and colonize
Martinique. Our country had to exist and send our ships there. IF God
aimed at just that result, the means by which the centuries bent their
influences towards it, showed exquisite intelligence. And so of any
state of things whatever, either in nature or in history, which we
find actually realized. For the parts of things must always make SOME
definite resultant, be it chaotic or harmonious. When we look at what
has actually come, the conditions must always appear perfectly designed
to ensure it. We can always say, therefore, in any conceivable world, of
any conceivable character, that the whole cosmic machinery MAY have been
designed to produce it.

Pragmatically, then, the abstract word 'design' is a blank cartridge. It
carries no consequences, it does no execution. What sort of design? and
what sort of a designer? are the only serious questions, and the study
of facts is the only way of getting even approximate answers. Meanwhile,
pending the slow answer from facts, anyone who insists that there is a
designer and who is sure he is a divine one, gets a certain pragmatic
benefit from the term--the same, in fact which we saw that the terms
God, Spirit, or the Absolute, yield us 'Design,' worthless tho it be
as a mere rationalistic principle set above or behind things for our
admiration, becomes, if our faith concretes it into something theistic,
a term of PROMISE. Returning with it into experience, we gain a more
confiding outlook on the future. If not a blind force but a seeing
force runs things, we may reasonably expect better issues. This vague
confidence in the future is the sole pragmatic meaning at present
discernible in the terms design and designer. But if cosmic confidence
is right not wrong, better not worse, that is a most important meaning.
That much at least of possible 'truth' the terms will then have in them.

Let me take up another well-worn controversy, THE FREE-WILL PROBLEM.
Most persons who believe in what is called their free-will do so after
the rationalistic fashion. It is a principle, a positive faculty or
virtue added to man, by which his dignity is enigmatically augmented. He
ought to believe it for this reason. Determinists, who deny it, who say
that individual men originate nothing, but merely transmit to the
future the whole push of the past cosmos of which they are so small
an expression, diminish man. He is less admirable, stripped of this
creative principle. I imagine that more than half of you share our
instinctive belief in free-will, and that admiration of it as a
principle of dignity has much to do with your fidelity.