Thus if no future detail of experience or conduct is to be deduced from
our hypothesis, the debate between materialism and theism becomes quite
idle and insignificant. Matter and God in that event mean exactly the
same thing--the power, namely, neither more nor less, that could make
just this completed world--and the wise man is he who in such a case
would turn his back on such a supererogatory discussion. Accordingly,
most men instinctively, and positivists and scientists deliberately,
do turn their backs on philosophical disputes from which nothing in the
line of definite future consequences can be seen to follow. The verbal
and empty character of philosophy is surely a reproach with which we
are, but too familiar. If pragmatism be true, it is a perfectly sound
reproach unless the theories under fire can be shown to have alternative
practical outcomes, however delicate and distant these may be. The
common man and the scientist say they discover no such outcomes, and if
the metaphysician can discern none either, the others certainly are
in the right of it, as against him. His science is then but pompous
trifling; and the endowment of a professorship for such a being would be
silly.

Accordingly, in every genuine metaphysical debate some practical issue,
however conjectural and remote, is involved. To realize this, revert
with me to our question, and place yourselves this time in the world we
live in, in the world that HAS a future, that is yet uncompleted whilst
we speak. In this unfinished world the alternative of 'materialism or
theism?' is intensely practical; and it is worth while for us to spend
some minutes of our hour in seeing that it is so.

How, indeed, does the program differ for us, according as we consider
that the facts of experience up to date are purposeless configurations
of blind atoms moving according to eternal laws, or that on the other
hand they are due to the providence of God? As far as the past facts
go, indeed there is no difference. Those facts are in, are bagged, are
captured; and the good that's in them is gained, be the atoms or be the
God their cause. There are accordingly many materialists about us
to-day who, ignoring altogether the future and practical aspects of the
question, seek to eliminate the odium attaching to the word materialism,
and even to eliminate the word itself, by showing that, if matter could
give birth to all these gains, why then matter, functionally considered,
is just as divine an entity as God, in fact coalesces with God, is what
you mean by God. Cease, these persons advise us, to use either of these
terms, with their outgrown opposition. Use a term free of the clerical
connotations, on the one hand; of the suggestion of gross-ness,
coarseness, ignobility, on the other. Talk of the primal mystery, of the
unknowable energy, of the one and only power, instead of saying either
God or matter. This is the course to which Mr. Spencer urges us; and if
philosophy were purely retrospective, he would thereby proclaim himself
an excellent pragmatist.