It is quite evident that our obligation to acknowledge truth, so far
from being unconditional, is tremendously conditioned. Truth with a big
T, and in the singular, claims abstractly to be recognized, of course;
but concrete truths in the plural need be recognized only when their
recognition is expedient. A truth must always be preferred to a
falsehood when both relate to the situation; but when neither does,
truth is as little of a duty as falsehood. If you ask me what o'clock it
is and I tell you that I live at 95 Irving Street, my answer may indeed
be true, but you don't see why it is my duty to give it. A false address
would be as much to the purpose.

With this admission that there are conditions that limit the application
of the abstract imperative, THE PRAGMATISTIC TREATMENT OF TRUTH SWEEPS
BACK UPON US IN ITS FULNESS. Our duty to agree with reality is seen to
be grounded in a perfect jungle of concrete expediencies.

When Berkeley had explained what people meant by matter, people thought
that he denied matter's existence. When Messrs. Schiller and Dewey
now explain what people mean by truth, they are accused of denying ITS
existence. These pragmatists destroy all objective standards, critics
say, and put foolishness and wisdom on one level. A favorite formula for
describing Mr. Schiller's doctrines and mine is that we are persons who
think that by saying whatever you find it pleasant to say and calling it
truth you fulfil every pragmatistic requirement.

I leave it to you to judge whether this be not an impudent slander. Pent
in, as the pragmatist more than anyone else sees himself to be, between
the whole body of funded truths squeezed from the past and the coercions
of the world of sense about him, who so well as he feels the immense
pressure of objective control under which our minds perform their
operations? If anyone imagines that this law is lax, let him keep its
commandment one day, says Emerson. We have heard much of late of the
uses of the imagination in science. It is high time to urge the use of
a little imagination in philosophy. The unwillingness of some of our
critics to read any but the silliest of possible meanings into our
statements is as discreditable to their imaginations as anything I know
in recent philosophic history. Schiller says the true is that which
'works.' Thereupon he is treated as one who limits verification to
the lowest material utilities. Dewey says truth is what gives
'satisfaction.' He is treated as one who believes in calling everything
true which, if it were true, would be pleasant.