From this simple cue pragmatism gets her general notion of truth as
something essentially bound up with the way in which one moment in our
experience may lead us towards other moments which it will be worth
while to have been led to. Primarily, and on the common-sense level, the
truth of a state of mind means this function of A LEADING THAT IS WORTH
WHILE. When a moment in our experience, of any kind whatever, inspires
us with a thought that is true, that means that sooner or later we dip
by that thought's guidance into the particulars of experience again and
make advantageous connexion with them. This is a vague enough statement,
but I beg you to retain it, for it is essential.

Our experience meanwhile is all shot through with regularities. One
bit of it can warn us to get ready for another bit, can 'intend' or
be 'significant of' that remoter object. The object's advent is the
significance's verification. Truth, in these cases, meaning nothing but
eventual verification, is manifestly incompatible with waywardness on
our part. Woe to him whose beliefs play fast and loose with the order
which realities follow in his experience: they will lead him nowhere or
else make false connexions.

By 'realities' or 'objects' here, we mean either things of common sense,
sensibly present, or else common-sense relations, such as dates, places,
distances, kinds, activities. Following our mental image of a house
along the cow-path, we actually come to see the house; we get the
image's full verification. SUCH SIMPLY AND FULLY VERIFIED LEADINGS ARE
CERTAINLY THE ORIGINALS AND PROTOTYPES OF THE TRUTH-PROCESS. Experience
offers indeed other forms of truth-process, but they are all conceivable
as being primary verifications arrested, multiplied or substituted one
for another.

Take, for instance, yonder object on the wall. You and I consider it to
be a 'clock,' altho no one of us has seen the hidden works that make it
one. We let our notion pass for true without attempting to verify. If
truths mean verification-process essentially, ought we then to call such
unverified truths as this abortive? No, for they form the overwhelmingly
large number of the truths we live by. Indirect as well as direct
verifications pass muster. Where circumstantial evidence is sufficient,
we can go without eye-witnessing. Just as we here assume Japan to exist
without ever having been there, because it WORKS to do so, everything we
know conspiring with the belief, and nothing interfering, so we assume
that thing to be a clock. We USE it as a clock, regulating the length
of our lecture by it. The verification of the assumption here means its
leading to no frustration or contradiction. VerifiABILITY of wheels and
weights and pendulum is as good as verification. For one truth-process
completed there are a million in our lives that function in this state
of nascency. They turn us TOWARDS direct verification; lead us into the
SURROUNDINGS of the objects they envisage; and then, if everything runs
on harmoniously, we are so sure that verification is possible that we
omit it, and are usually justified by all that happens.