Philosophy is at once the most sublime and the most trivial of human
pursuits. It works in the minutest crannies and it opens out the widest
vistas. It 'bakes no bread,' as has been said, but it can inspire our
souls with courage; and repugnant as its manners, its doubting and
challenging, its quibbling and dialectics, often are to common people,
no one of us can get along without the far-flashing beams of light it
sends over the world's perspectives. These illuminations at least, and
the contrast-effects of darkness and mystery that accompany them, give
to what it says an interest that is much more than professional.

The history of philosophy is to a great extent that of a certain clash
of human temperaments. Undignified as such a treatment may seem to some
of my colleagues, I shall have to take account of this clash and explain
a good many of the divergencies of philosophers by it. Of whatever
temperament a professional philosopher is, he tries when philosophizing
to sink the fact of his temperament. Temperament is no conventionally
recognized reason, so he urges impersonal reasons only for his
conclusions. Yet his temperament really gives him a stronger bias than
any of his more strictly objective premises. It loads the evidence
for him one way or the other, making for a more sentimental or a more
hard-hearted view of the universe, just as this fact or that principle
would. He trusts his temperament. Wanting a universe that suits it, he
believes in any representation of the universe that does suit it.
He feels men of opposite temper to be out of key with the world's
character, and in his heart considers them incompetent and 'not in
it,' in the philosophic business, even tho they may far excel him in
dialectical ability.

Yet in the forum he can make no claim, on the bare ground of his
temperament, to superior discernment or authority. There arises thus a
certain insincerity in our philosophic discussions: the potentest of
all our premises is never mentioned. I am sure it would contribute to
clearness if in these lectures we should break this rule and mention it,
and I accordingly feel free to do so.

Of course I am talking here of very positively marked men, men
of radical idiosyncracy, who have set their stamp and likeness on
philosophy and figure in its history. Plato, Locke, Hegel, Spencer,
are such temperamental thinkers. Most of us have, of course, no
very definite intellectual temperament, we are a mixture of opposite
ingredients, each one present very moderately. We hardly know our own
preferences in abstract matters; some of us are easily talked out of
them, and end by following the fashion or taking up with the beliefs of
the most impressive philosopher in our neighborhood, whoever he may be.
But the one thing that has COUNTED so far in philosophy is that a man
should see things, see them straight in his own peculiar way, and be
dissatisfied with any opposite way of seeing them. There is no reason
to suppose that this strong temperamental vision is from now onward to
count no longer in the history of man's beliefs.