O I could sing such grandeurs and glories about you! You have not known
what you are--you have slumber'd upon yourself all your life; What you
have done returns already in mockeries.

But the mockeries are not you; Underneath them, and within them, I see
you lurk; I pursue you where none else has pursued you; Silence, the
desk, the flippant expression, the night, the accustom'd routine, if
these conceal you from others, or from yourself, they do not conceal you
from me; The shaved face, the unsteady eye, the impure complexion, if
these balk others, they do not balk me, The pert apparel, the deform'd
attitude, drunkenness, greed, premature death, all these I part aside.

There is no endowment in man or woman that is not tallied in you; There
is no virtue, no beauty, in man or woman, but as good is in you; No
pluck, no endurance in others, but as good is in you; No pleasure
waiting for others, but an equal pleasure waits for you.

Whoever you are! claim your own at any hazard! These shows of the
east and west are tame, compared to you; These immense meadows--these
interminable rivers--you are immense and interminable as they; You are
he or she who is master or mistress over them, Master or mistress in
your own right over Nature, elements, pain, passion, dissolution.

The hopples fall from your ankles--you find an unfailing sufficiency;
Old or young, male or female, rude, low, rejected by the rest, whatever
you are promulges itself; Through birth, life, death, burial, the means
are provided, nothing is scanted; Through angers, losses, ambition,
ignorance, ennui, what you are picks its way.

Verily a fine and moving poem, in any case, but there are two ways of
taking it, both useful.

One is the monistic way, the mystical way of pure cosmic emotion. The
glories and grandeurs, they are yours absolutely, even in the midst of
your defacements. Whatever may happen to you, whatever you may appear to
be, inwardly you are safe. Look back, LIE back, on your true principle
of being! This is the famous way of quietism, of indifferentism. Its
enemies compare it to a spiritual opium. Yet pragmatism must respect
this way, for it has massive historic vindication.

But pragmatism sees another way to be respected also, the pluralistic
way of interpreting the poem. The you so glorified, to which the hymn
is sung, may mean your better possibilities phenomenally taken, or the
specific redemptive effects even of your failures, upon yourself or
others. It may mean your loyalty to the possibilities of others whom you
admire and love so, that you are willing to accept your own poor life,
for it is that glory's partner. You can at least appreciate, applaud,
furnish the audience, of so brave a total world. Forget the low in
yourself, then, think only of the high. Identify your life therewith;
then, through angers, losses, ignorance, ennui, whatever you thus make
yourself, whatever you thus most deeply are, picks its way.

In either way of taking the poem, it encourages fidelity to ourselves.
Both ways satisfy; both sanctify the human flux. Both paint the portrait
of the YOU on a gold-background. But the background of the first way
is the static One, while in the second way it means possibles in the
plural, genuine possibles, and it has all the restlessness of that
conception.