But often the day's contents oblige a rearrangement. If I should now
utter piercing shrieks and act like a maniac on this platform, it
would make many of you revise your ideas as to the probable worth of my
philosophy. 'Radium' came the other day as part of the day's content,
and seemed for a moment to contradict our ideas of the whole order of
nature, that order having come to be identified with what is called
the conservation of energy. The mere sight of radium paying heat away
indefinitely out of its own pocket seemed to violate that conservation.
What to think? If the radiations from it were nothing but an escape of
unsuspected 'potential' energy, pre-existent inside of the atoms, the
principle of conservation would be saved. The discovery of 'helium' as
the radiation's outcome, opened a way to this belief. So Ramsay's view
is generally held to be true, because, altho it extends our old ideas of
energy, it causes a minimum of alteration in their nature.

I need not multiply instances. A new opinion counts as 'true' just in
proportion as it gratifies the individual's desire to assimilate the
novel in his experience to his beliefs in stock. It must both lean on
old truth and grasp new fact; and its success (as I said a moment ago)
in doing this, is a matter for the individual's appreciation. When
old truth grows, then, by new truth's addition, it is for subjective
reasons. We are in the process and obey the reasons. That new idea is
truest which performs most felicitously its function of satisfying our
double urgency. It makes itself true, gets itself classed as true, by
the way it works; grafting itself then upon the ancient body of truth,
which thus grows much as a tree grows by the activity of a new layer of
cambium.

Now Dewey and Schiller proceed to generalize this observation and
to apply it to the most ancient parts of truth. They also once were
plastic. They also were called true for human reasons. They also
mediated between still earlier truths and what in those days were novel
observations. Purely objective truth, truth in whose establishment the
function of giving human satisfaction in marrying previous parts of
experience with newer parts played no role whatever, is nowhere to be
found. The reasons why we call things true is the reason why they ARE
true, for 'to be true' MEANS only to perform this marriage-function.

The trail of the human serpent is thus over everything. Truth
independent; truth that we FIND merely; truth no longer malleable to
human need; truth incorrigible, in a word; such truth exists indeed
superabundantly--or is supposed to exist by rationalistically minded
thinkers; but then it means only the dead heart of the living tree, and
its being there means only that truth also has its paleontology and its
'prescription,' and may grow stiff with years of veteran service and
petrified in men's regard by sheer antiquity. But how plastic even the
oldest truths nevertheless really are has been vividly shown in our
day by the transformation of logical and mathematical ideas, a
transformation which seems even to be invading physics. The ancient
formulas are reinterpreted as special expressions of much wider
principles, principles that our ancestors never got a glimpse of in
their present shape and formulation.