Now it seems almost certain that young children and the inferior animals
take all their experiences very much as uninstructed Bostonians take
their weather. They know no more of time or space as world-receptacles,
or of permanent subjects and changing predicates, or of causes,
or kinds, or thoughts, or things, than our common people know of
continental cyclones. A baby's rattle drops out of his hand, but the
baby looks not for it. It has 'gone out' for him, as a candle-flame goes
out; and it comes back, when you replace it in his hand, as the flame
comes back when relit. The idea of its being a 'thing,' whose permanent
existence by itself he might interpolate between its successive
apparitions has evidently not occurred to him. It is the same with dogs.
Out of sight, out of mind, with them. It is pretty evident that they
have no GENERAL tendency to interpolate 'things.' Let me quote here a
passage from my colleague G. Santayana's book.

"If a dog, while sniffing about contentedly, sees afar off his master
arriving after long absence...the poor brute asks for no reason why
his master went, why he has come again, why he should be loved, or why
presently while lying at his feet you forget him and begin to grunt and
dream of the chase--all that is an utter mystery, utterly unconsidered.
Such experience has variety, scenery, and a certain vital rhythm;
its story might be told in dithyrambic verse. It moves wholly by
inspiration; every event is providential, every act unpremeditated.
Absolute freedom and absolute helplessness have met together: you
depend wholly on divine favour, yet that unfathomable agency is not
distinguishable from your own life. ...[But] the figures even of that
disordered drama have their exits and their entrances; and their cues
can be gradually discovered by a being capable of fixing his
attention and retaining the order of events. ...In proportion as such
understanding advances each moment of experience becomes consequential
and prophetic of the rest. The calm places in life are filled with power
and its spasms with resource. No emotion can overwhelm the mind, for
of none is the basis or issue wholly hidden; no event can disconcert it
altogether, because it sees beyond. Means can be looked for to escape
from the worst predicament; and whereas each moment had been formerly
filled with nothing but its own adventure and surprised emotion, each
now makes room for the lesson of what went before and surmises what
may be the plot of the whole."[Footnote: The Life of Reason: Reason in
Common Sense, 1905, p. 59.]

Even to-day science and philosophy are still laboriously trying to part
fancies from realities in our experience; and in primitive times they
made only the most incipient distinctions in this line. Men believed
whatever they thought with any liveliness, and they mixed their dreams
with their realities inextricably. The categories of 'thought' and
'things' are indispensable here--instead of being realities we now call
certain experiences only 'thoughts.' There is not a category, among
those enumerated, of which we may not imagine the use to have thus
originated historically and only gradually spread.