'What would be better for us to believe'! This sounds very like a
definition of truth. It comes very near to saying 'what we OUGHT to
believe': and in THAT definition none of you would find any oddity.
Ought we ever not to believe what it is BETTER FOR US to believe? And
can we then keep the notion of what is better for us, and what is true
for us, permanently apart?

Pragmatism says no, and I fully agree with her. Probably you also agree,
so far as the abstract statement goes, but with a suspicion that if
we practically did believe everything that made for good in our own
personal lives, we should be found indulging all kinds of fancies about
this world's affairs, and all kinds of sentimental superstitions about a
world hereafter. Your suspicion here is undoubtedly well founded, and it
is evident that something happens when you pass from the abstract to the
concrete, that complicates the situation.

I said just now that what is better for us to believe is true UNLESS THE
BELIEF INCIDENTALLY CLASHES WITH SOME OTHER VITAL BENEFIT. Now in real
life what vital benefits is any particular belief of ours most liable
to clash with? What indeed except the vital benefits yielded by OTHER
BELIEFS when these prove incompatible with the first ones? In other
words, the greatest enemy of any one of our truths may be the rest
of our truths. Truths have once for all this desperate instinct of
self-preservation and of desire to extinguish whatever contradicts them.
My belief in the Absolute, based on the good it does me, must run the
gauntlet of all my other beliefs. Grant that it may be true in giving me
a moral holiday. Nevertheless, as I conceive it,--and let me speak now
confidentially, as it were, and merely in my own private person,--it
clashes with other truths of mine whose benefits I hate to give up on
its account. It happens to be associated with a kind of logic of which I
am the enemy, I find that it entangles me in metaphysical paradoxes
that are inacceptable, etc., etc.. But as I have enough trouble in
life already without adding the trouble of carrying these intellectual
inconsistencies, I personally just give up the Absolute. I just TAKE my
moral holidays; or else as a professional philosopher, I try to justify
them by some other principle.

If I could restrict my notion of the Absolute to its bare holiday-giving
value, it wouldn't clash with my other truths. But we cannot easily thus
restrict our hypotheses. They carry supernumerary features, and these it
is that clash so. My disbelief in the Absolute means then disbelief
in those other supernumerary features, for I fully believe in the
legitimacy of taking moral holidays.

You see by this what I meant when I called pragmatism a mediator and
reconciler and said, borrowing the word from Papini, that he unstiffens
our theories. She has in fact no prejudices whatever, no obstructive
dogmas, no rigid canons of what shall count as proof. She is completely
genial. She will entertain any hypothesis, she will consider any
evidence. It follows that in the religious field she is at a great
advantage both over positivistic empiricism, with its anti-theological
bias, and over religious rationalism, with its exclusive interest in
the remote, the noble, the simple, and the abstract in the way of
conception.