To an abstract objection an abstract rejoinder suffices; and so far as
one's opposition to materialism springs from one's disdain of matter as
something 'crass,' Mr. Spencer cuts the ground from under one. Matter is
indeed infinitely and incredibly refined. To anyone who has ever looked
on the face of a dead child or parent the mere fact that matter COULD
have taken for a time that precious form, ought to make matter sacred
ever after. It makes no difference what the PRINCIPLE of life may be,
material or immaterial, matter at any rate co-operates, lends itself
to all life's purposes. That beloved incarnation was among matter's
possibilities.

But now, instead of resting in principles after this stagnant
intellectualist fashion, let us apply the pragmatic method to the
question. What do we MEAN by matter? What practical difference can it
make NOW that the world should be run by matter or by spirit? I think we
find that the problem takes with this a rather different character.

And first of all I call your attention to a curious fact. It makes not
a single jot of difference so far as the PAST of the world goes, whether
we deem it to have been the work of matter or whether we think a divine
spirit was its author.

Imagine, in fact, the entire contents of the world to be once for all
irrevocably given. Imagine it to end this very moment, and to have
no future; and then let a theist and a materialist apply their rival
explanations to its history. The theist shows how a God made it; the
materialist shows, and we will suppose with equal success, how it
resulted from blind physical forces. Then let the pragmatist be asked to
choose between their theories. How can he apply his test if the world
is already completed? Concepts for him are things to come back into
experience with, things to make us look for differences. But by
hypothesis there is to be no more experience and no possible differences
can now be looked for. Both theories have shown all their consequences
and, by the hypothesis we are adopting, these are identical. The
pragmatist must consequently say that the two theories, in spite of
their different-sounding names, mean exactly the same thing, and that
the dispute is purely verbal. [I am opposing, of course, that the
theories HAVE been equally successful in their explanations of what is.]