What hardens the heart of everyone I approach with the view of truth
sketched in my last lecture is that typical idol of the tribe, the
notion of THE Truth, conceived as the one answer, determinate and
complete, to the one fixed enigma which the world is believed to
propound. For popular tradition, it is all the better if the answer
be oracular, so as itself to awaken wonder as an enigma of the second
order, veiling rather than revealing what its profundities are supposed
to contain. All the great single-word answers to the world's riddle,
such as God, the One, Reason, Law, Spirit, Matter, Nature, Polarity, the
Dialectic Process, the Idea, the Self, the Oversoul, draw the admiration
that men have lavished on them from this oracular role. By amateurs in
philosophy and professionals alike, the universe is represented as
a queer sort of petrified sphinx whose appeal to man consists in a
monotonous challenge to his divining powers. THE Truth: what a perfect
idol of the rationalistic mind! I read in an old letter--from a gifted
friend who died too young--these words: "In everything, in science, art,
morals and religion, there MUST be one system that is right and EVERY
other wrong." How characteristic of the enthusiasm of a certain stage of
youth! At twenty-one we rise to such a challenge and expect to find the
system. It never occurs to most of us even later that the question 'what
is THE truth?' is no real question (being irrelative to all conditions)
and that the whole notion of THE truth is an abstraction from the fact
of truths in the plural, a mere useful summarizing phrase like THE Latin
Language or THE Law.

Common-law judges sometimes talk about the law, and school-masters talk
about the latin tongue, in a way to make their hearers think they mean
entities pre-existent to the decisions or to the words and syntax,
determining them unequivocally and requiring them to obey. But the
slightest exercise of reflexion makes us see that, instead of being
principles of this kind, both law and latin are results. Distinctions
between the lawful and the unlawful in conduct, or between the
correct and incorrect in speech, have grown up incidentally among the
interactions of men's experiences in detail; and in no other way do
distinctions between the true and the false in belief ever grow up.
Truth grafts itself on previous truth, modifying it in the process, just
as idiom grafts itself on previous idiom, and law on previous law. Given
previous law and a novel case, and the judge will twist them into fresh
law. Previous idiom; new slang or metaphor or oddity that hits the
public taste:--and presto, a new idiom is made. Previous truth; fresh
facts:--and our mind finds a new truth.