Free-will is thus a general cosmological theory of PROMISE, just like
the Absolute, God, Spirit or Design. Taken abstractly, no one of these
terms has any inner content, none of them gives us any picture, and
no one of them would retain the least pragmatic value in a world
whose character was obviously perfect from the start. Elation at mere
existence, pure cosmic emotion and delight, would, it seems to me,
quench all interest in those speculations, if the world were nothing but
a lubberland of happiness already. Our interest in religious metaphysics
arises in the fact that our empirical future feels to us unsafe, and
needs some higher guarantee. If the past and present were purely good,
who could wish that the future might possibly not resemble them? Who
could desire free-will? Who would not say, with Huxley, "let me be wound
up every day like a watch, to go right fatally, and I ask no better
freedom." 'Freedom' in a world already perfect could only mean
freedom to BE WORSE, and who could be so insane as to wish that? To be
necessarily what it is, to be impossibly aught else, would put the
last touch of perfection upon optimism's universe. Surely the only
POSSIBILITY that one can rationally claim is the possibility that things
may be BETTER. That possibility, I need hardly say, is one that, as the
actual world goes, we have ample grounds for desiderating.

Free-will thus has no meaning unless it be a doctrine of RELIEF. As
such, it takes its place with other religious doctrines. Between them,
they build up the old wastes and repair the former desolations. Our
spirit, shut within this courtyard of sense-experience, is always saying
to the intellect upon the tower: 'Watchman, tell us of the night, if it
aught of promise bear,' and the intellect gives it then these terms of
promise.

Other than this practical significance, the words God, free-will,
design, etc., have none. Yet dark tho they be in themselves, or
intellectualistically taken, when we bear them into life's thicket with
us the darkness THERE grows light about us. If you stop, in dealing with
such words, with their definition, thinking that to be an intellectual
finality, where are you? Stupidly staring at a pretentious sham! "Deus
est Ens, a se, extra et supra omne genus, necessarium, unum, infinite
perfectum, simplex, immutabile, immensum, aeternum, intelligens,"
etc.,--wherein is such a definition really instructive? It means less,
than nothing, in its pompous robe of adjectives. Pragmatism alone can
read a positive meaning into it, and for that she turns her back upon
the intellectualist point of view altogether. 'God's in his heaven;
all's right with the world!'--THAT'S the heart of your theology, and for
that you need no rationalist definitions.

Why shouldn't we all of us, rationalists as well as pragmatists, confess
this? Pragmatism, so far from keeping her eyes bent on the immediate
practical foreground, as she is accused of doing, dwells just as much
upon the world's remotest perspectives.