8. The GREAT monistic DENKMITTEL for a hundred years past has been
the notion of THE ONE KNOWER. The many exist only as objects for his
thought--exist in his dream, as it were; and AS HE KNOWS them, they have
one purpose, form one system, tell one tale for him. This notion of an
ALL-ENVELOPING NOETIC UNITY in things is the sublimest achievement of
intellectualist philosophy. Those who believe in the Absolute, as the
all-knower is termed, usually say that they do so for coercive reasons,
which clear thinkers cannot evade. The Absolute has far-reaching
practical consequences, some of which I drew attention in my second
lecture. Many kinds of difference important to us would surely follow
from its being true. I cannot here enter into all the logical proofs of
such a Being's existence, farther than to say that none of them seem to
me sound. I must therefore treat the notion of an All-Knower simply as
an hypothesis, exactly on a par logically with the pluralist notion that
there is no point of view, no focus of information extant, from
which the entire content of the universe is visible at once. "God's
consciousness," says Professor Royce,[Footnote: The Conception of
God, New York, 1897, p. 292.] "forms in its wholeness one luminously
transparent conscious moment"--this is the type of noetic unity on which
rationalism insists. Empiricism on the other hand is satisfied with the
type of noetic unity that is humanly familiar. Everything gets known by
SOME knower along with something else; but the knowers may in the end be
irreducibly many, and the greatest knower of them all may yet not know
the whole of everything, or even know what he does know at one single
stroke:--he may be liable to forget. Whichever type obtained, the world
would still be a universe noetically. Its parts would be conjoined
by knowledge, but in the one case the knowledge would be absolutely
unified, in the other it would be strung along and overlapped.

The notion of one instantaneous or eternal Knower--either adjective
here means the same thing--is, as I said, the great intellectualist
achievement of our time. It has practically driven out that conception
of 'Substance' which earlier philosophers set such store by, and by
which so much unifying work used to be done--universal substance which
alone has being in and from itself, and of which all the particulars
of experience are but forms to which it gives support. Substance has
succumbed to the pragmatic criticisms of the English school. It appears
now only as another name for the fact that phenomena as they come are
actually grouped and given in coherent forms, the very forms in which
we finite knowers experience or think them together. These forms of
conjunction are as much parts of the tissue of experience as are the
terms which they connect; and it is a great pragmatic achievement for
recent idealism to have made the world hang together in these directly
representable ways instead of drawing its unity from the 'inherence' of
its parts--whatever that may mean--in an unimaginable principle behind
the scenes.