It is strange, considering how unanimously our ancestors felt the force
of this argument, to see how little it counts for since the triumph
of the darwinian theory. Darwin opened our minds to the power of
chance-happenings to bring forth 'fit' results if only they have time
to add themselves together. He showed the enormous waste of nature in
producing results that get destroyed because of their unfitness. He also
emphasized the number of adaptations which, if designed, would argue
an evil rather than a good designer. Here all depends upon the point
of view. To the grub under the bark the exquisite fitness of the
woodpecker's organism to extract him would certainly argue a diabolical
designer.

Theologians have by this time stretched their minds so as to embrace
the darwinian facts, and yet to interpret them as still showing divine
purpose. It used to be a question of purpose AGAINST mechanism, of
one OR the other. It was as if one should say "My shoes are evidently
designed to fit my feet, hence it is impossible that they should have
been produced by machinery." We know that they are both: they are made
by a machinery itself designed to fit the feet with shoes. Theology need
only stretch similarly the designs of God. As the aim of a football-team
is not merely to get the ball to a certain goal (if that were so, they
would simply get up on some dark night and place it there), but to get
it there by a fixed MACHINERY OF CONDITIONS--the game's rules and the
opposing players; so the aim of God is not merely, let us say, to make
men and to save them, but rather to get this done through the sole
agency of nature's vast machinery. Without nature's stupendous laws and
counterforces, man's creation and perfection, we might suppose, would be
too insipid achievements for God to have designed them.

This saves the form of the design-argument at the expense of its old
easy human content. The designer is no longer the old man-like deity.
His designs have grown so vast as to be incomprehensible to us humans.
The WHAT of them so overwhelms us that to establish the mere THAT of a
designer for them becomes of very little consequence in comparison.
We can with difficulty comprehend the character of a cosmic mind whose
purposes are fully revealed by the strange mixture of goods and evils
that we find in this actual world's particulars. Or rather we cannot by
any possibility comprehend it. The mere word 'design' by itself has,
we see, no consequences and explains nothing. It is the barrenest of
principles. The old question of WHETHER there is design is idle.
The real question is WHAT is the world, whether or not it have a
designer--and that can be revealed only by the study of all nature's
particulars.