For all utilitarian practical purposes these conceptions amply suffice;
but that they began at special points of discovery and only gradually
spread from one thing to another, seems proved by the exceedingly
dubious limits of their application to-day. We assume for certain
purposes one 'objective' Time that AEQUABILITER FLUIT, but we don't
livingly believe in or realize any such equally-flowing time. 'Space'
is a less vague notion; but 'things,' what are they? Is a constellation
properly a thing? or an army? or is an ENS RATIONIS such as space or
justice a thing? Is a knife whose handle and blade are changed the
'same'? Is the 'changeling,' whom Locke so seriously discusses, of the
human 'kind'? Is 'telepathy' a 'fancy' or a 'fact'? The moment you pass
beyond the practical use of these categories (a use usually suggested
sufficiently by the circumstances of the special case) to a merely
curious or speculative way of thinking, you find it impossible to say
within just what limits of fact any one of them shall apply.

The peripatetic philosophy, obeying rationalist propensities, has
tried to eternalize the common-sense categories by treating them very
technically and articulately. A 'thing' for instance is a being, or
ENS. An ENS is a subject in which qualities 'inhere.' A subject is a
substance. Substances are of kinds, and kinds are definite in number,
and discrete. These distinctions are fundamental and eternal. As terms
of DISCOURSE they are indeed magnificently useful, but what they mean,
apart from their use in steering our discourse to profitable issues,
does not appear. If you ask a scholastic philosopher what a substance
may be in itself, apart from its being the support of attributes, he
simply says that your intellect knows perfectly what the word means.

But what the intellect knows clearly is only the word itself and its
steering function. So it comes about that intellects SIBI PERMISSI,
intellects only curious and idle, have forsaken the common-sense level
for what in general terms may be called the 'critical' level of thought.
Not merely SUCH intellects either--your Humes and Berkeleys and Hegels;
but practical observers of facts, your Galileos, Daltons, Faradays, have
found it impossible to treat the NAIFS sense-termini of common sense
as ultimately real. As common sense interpolates her constant 'things'
between our intermittent sensations, so science EXTRApolates her world
of 'primary' qualities, her atoms, her ether, her magnetic fields, and
the like, beyond the common-sense world. The 'things' are now invisible
impalpable things; and the old visible common-sense things are supposed
to result from the mixture of these invisibles. Or else the whole NAIF
conception of thing gets superseded, and a thing's name is interpreted
as denoting only the law or REGEL DER VERBINDUNG by which certain of our
sensations habitually succeed or coexist.

Science and critical philosophy thus burst the bounds of common sense.
With science NAIF realism ceases: 'Secondary' qualities become unreal;
primary ones alone remain. With critical philosophy, havoc is made of
everything. The common-sense categories one and all cease to represent
anything in the way of BEING; they are but sublime tricks of human
thought, our ways of escaping bewilderment in the midst of sensation's
irremediable flow.