But as the sciences have developed farther, the notion has gained ground
that most, perhaps all, of our laws are only approximations. The laws
themselves, moreover, have grown so numerous that there is no counting
them; and so many rival formulations are proposed in all the branches of
science that investigators have become accustomed to the notion that no
theory is absolutely a transcript of reality, but that any one of them
may from some point of view be useful. Their great use is to summarize
old facts and to lead to new ones. They are only a man-made language,
a conceptual shorthand, as someone calls them, in which we write our
reports of nature; and languages, as is well known, tolerate much choice
of expression and many dialects.

Thus human arbitrariness has driven divine necessity from scientific
logic. If I mention the names of Sigwart, Mach, Ostwald, Pearson,
Milhaud, Poincare, Duhem, Ruyssen, those of you who are students will
easily identify the tendency I speak of, and will think of additional
names.

Riding now on the front of this wave of scientific logic Messrs.
Schiller and Dewey appear with their pragmatistic account of what truth
everywhere signifies. Everywhere, these teachers say, 'truth' in our
ideas and beliefs means the same thing that it means in science. It
means, they say, nothing but this, THAT IDEAS (WHICH THEMSELVES ARE BUT
PARTS OF OUR EXPERIENCE) BECOME TRUE JUST IN SO FAR AS THEY HELP US TO
GET INTO SATISFACTORY RELATION WITH OTHER PARTS OF OUR EXPERIENCE, to
summarize them and get about among them by conceptual short-cuts instead
of following the interminable succession of particular phenomena. Any
idea upon which we can ride, so to speak; any idea that will carry us
prosperously from any one part of our experience to any other part,
linking things satisfactorily, working securely, simplifying,
saving labor; is true for just so much, true in so far forth, true
INSTRUMENTALLY. This is the 'instrumental' view of truth taught so
successfully at Chicago, the view that truth in our ideas means their
power to 'work,' promulgated so brilliantly at Oxford.

Messrs. Dewey, Schiller and their allies, in reaching this general
conception of all truth, have only followed the example of geologists,
biologists and philologists. In the establishment of these other
sciences, the successful stroke was always to take some simple process
actually observable in operation--as denudation by weather, say, or
variation from parental type, or change of dialect by incorporation of
new words and pronunciations--and then to generalize it, making it apply
to all times, and produce great results by summating its effects through
the ages.