Absolute oneness remains, but only as an hypothesis, and that hypothesis
is reduced nowadays to that of an omniscient knower who sees all things
without exception as forming one single systematic fact. But the knower
in question may still be conceived either as an Absolute or as an
Ultimate; and over against the hypothesis of him in either form the
counter-hypothesis that the widest field of knowledge that ever was or
will be still contains some ignorance, may be legitimately held. Some
bits of information always may escape.

This is the hypothesis of NOETIC PLURALISM, which monists consider so
absurd. Since we are bound to treat it as respectfully as noetic monism,
until the facts shall have tipped the beam, we find that our pragmatism,
tho originally nothing but a method, has forced us to be friendly to the
pluralistic view. It MAY be that some parts of the world are connected
so loosely with some other parts as to be strung along by nothing but
the copula AND. They might even come and go without those other parts
suffering any internal change. This pluralistic view, of a world of
ADDITIVE constitution, is one that pragmatism is unable to rule out from
serious consideration. But this view leads one to the farther hypothesis
that the actual world, instead of being complete 'eternally,' as the
monists assure us, may be eternally incomplete, and at all times subject
to addition or liable to loss.

It IS at any rate incomplete in one respect, and flagrantly so. The very
fact that we debate this question shows that our KNOWLEDGE is incomplete
at present and subject to addition. In respect of the knowledge it
contains the world does genuinely change and grow. Some general remarks
on the way in which our knowledge completes itself--when it does
complete itself--will lead us very conveniently into our subject for
this lecture, which is 'Common Sense.'

To begin with, our knowledge grows IN SPOTS. The spots may be large or
small, but the knowledge never grows all over: some old knowledge always
remains what it was. Your knowledge of pragmatism, let us suppose, is
growing now. Later, its growth may involve considerable modification of
opinions which you previously held to be true. But such modifications
are apt to be gradual. To take the nearest possible example, consider
these lectures of mine. What you first gain from them is probably a
small amount of new information, a few new definitions, or distinctions,
or points of view. But while these special ideas are being added, the
rest of your knowledge stands still, and only gradually will you 'line
up' your previous opinions with the novelties I am trying to instil, and
modify to some slight degree their mass.

You listen to me now, I suppose, with certain prepossessions as to my
competency, and these affect your reception of what I say, but were I
suddenly to break off lecturing, and to begin to sing 'We won't go home
till morning' in a rich baritone voice, not only would that new fact be
added to your stock, but it would oblige you to define me differently,
and that might alter your opinion of the pragmatic philosophy, and in
general bring about a rearrangement of a number of your ideas. Your mind
in such processes is strained, and sometimes painfully so, between its
older beliefs and the novelties which experience brings along.