For just consider the case sincerely, and say what would be the WORTH
of a God if he WERE there, with his work accomplished and his world run
down. He would be worth no more than just that world was worth. To that
amount of result, with its mixed merits and defects, his creative power
could attain, but go no farther. And since there is to be no future;
since the whole value and meaning of the world has been already paid in
and actualized in the feelings that went with it in the passing, and now
go with it in the ending; since it draws no supplemental significance
(such as our real world draws) from its function of preparing something
yet to come; why then, by it we take God's measure, as it were. He
is the Being who could once for all do THAT; and for that much we
are thankful to him, but for nothing more. But now, on the contrary
hypothesis, namely, that the bits of matter following their laws could
make that world and do no less, should we not be just as thankful to
them? Wherein should we suffer loss, then, if we dropped God as an
hypothesis and made the matter alone responsible? Where would any
special deadness, or crassness, come in? And how, experience being what
is once for all, would God's presence in it make it any more living or
richer?

Candidly, it is impossible to give any answer to this question. The
actually experienced world is supposed to be the same in its details
on either hypothesis, "the same, for our praise or blame," as Browning
says. It stands there indefeasibly: a gift which can't be taken back.
Calling matter the cause of it retracts no single one of the items that
have made it up, nor does calling God the cause augment them. They are
the God or the atoms, respectively, of just that and no other world. The
God, if there, has been doing just what atoms could do--appearing in the
character of atoms, so to speak--and earning such gratitude as is due to
atoms, and no more. If his presence lends no different turn or issue to
the performance, it surely can lend it no increase of dignity. Nor would
indignity come to it were he absent, and did the atoms remain the only
actors on the stage. When a play is once over, and the curtain down,
you really make it no better by claiming an illustrious genius for its
author, just as you make it no worse by calling him a common hack.