But the scientific tendency in critical thought, tho inspired at first
by purely intellectual motives, has opened an entirely unexpected range
of practical utilities to our astonished view. Galileo gave us accurate
clocks and accurate artillery-practice; the chemists flood us with new
medicines and dye-stuffs; Ampere and Faraday have endowed us with the
New York subway and with Marconi telegrams. The hypothetical things that
such men have invented, defined as they have defined them, are showing
an extraordinary fertility in consequences verifiable by sense. Our
logic can deduce from them a consequence due under certain conditions,
we can then bring about the conditions, and presto, the consequence
is there before our eyes. The scope of the practical control of nature
newly put into our hand by scientific ways of thinking vastly exceeds
the scope of the old control grounded on common sense. Its rate of
increase accelerates so that no one can trace the limit; one may even
fear that the BEING of man may be crushed by his own powers, that his
fixed nature as an organism may not prove adequate to stand the strain
of the ever increasingly tremendous functions, almost divine creative
functions, which his intellect will more and more enable him to wield.
He may drown in his wealth like a child in a bath-tub, who has turned on
the water and who cannot turn it off.

The philosophic stage of criticism, much more thorough in its negations
than the scientific stage, so far gives us no new range of practical
power. Locke, Hume, Berkeley, Kant, Hegel, have all been utterly
sterile, so far as shedding any light on the details of nature goes, and
I can think of no invention or discovery that can be directly traced
to anything in their peculiar thought, for neither with Berkeley's
tar-water nor with Kant's nebular hypothesis had their respective
philosophic tenets anything to do. The satisfactions they yield to their
disciples are intellectual, not practical; and even then we have to
confess that there is a large minus-side to the account.

There are thus at least three well-characterized levels, stages or types
of thought about the world we live in, and the notions of one stage
have one kind of merit, those of another stage another kind. It is
impossible, however, to say that any stage as yet in sight is absolutely
more TRUE than any other. Common sense is the more CONSOLIDATED stage,
because it got its innings first, and made all language into its ally.
Whether it or science be the more AUGUST stage may be left to private
judgment. But neither consolidation nor augustness are decisive marks of
truth. If common sense were true, why should science have had to
brand the secondary qualities, to which our world owes all its living
interest, as false, and to invent an invisible world of points and
curves and mathematical equations instead? Why should it have needed
to transform causes and activities into laws of 'functional variation'?
Vainly did scholasticism, common sense's college-trained younger sister,
seek to stereotype the forms the human family had always talked with,
to make them definite and fix them for eternity. Substantial forms (in
other words our secondary qualities) hardly outlasted the year of our
Lord 1600. People were already tired of them then; and Galileo, and
Descartes, with his 'new philosophy,' gave them only a little later
their coup de grace.