Yet in the choice of these man-made formulas we cannot be capricious
with impunity any more than we can be capricious on the common-sense
practical level. We must find a theory that will WORK; and that means
something extremely difficult; for our theory must mediate between all
previous truths and certain new experiences. It must derange common
sense and previous belief as little as possible, and it must lead to
some sensible terminus or other that can be verified exactly. To 'work'
means both these things; and the squeeze is so tight that there is
little loose play for any hypothesis. Our theories are wedged and
controlled as nothing else is. Yet sometimes alternative theoretic
formulas are equally compatible with all the truths we know, and then we
choose between them for subjective reasons. We choose the kind of theory
to which we are already partial; we follow 'elegance' or 'economy.'
Clerk Maxwell somewhere says it would be "poor scientific taste" to
choose the more complicated of two equally well-evidenced conceptions;
and you will all agree with him. Truth in science is what gives us the
maximum possible sum of satisfactions, taste included, but consistency
both with previous truth and with novel fact is always the most
imperious claimant.

I have led you through a very sandy desert. But now, if I may be allowed
so vulgar an expression, we begin to taste the milk in the cocoanut. Our
rationalist critics here discharge their batteries upon us, and to reply
to them will take us out from all this dryness into full sight of a
momentous philosophical alternative.

Our account of truth is an account of truths in the plural, of processes
of leading, realized in rebus, and having only this quality in common,
that they PAY. They pay by guiding us into or towards some part of a
system that dips at numerous points into sense-percepts, which we may
copy mentally or not, but with which at any rate we are now in the kind
of commerce vaguely designated as verification. Truth for us is simply
a collective name for verification-processes, just as health, wealth,
strength, etc., are names for other processes connected with life, and
also pursued because it pays to pursue them. Truth is MADE, just as
health, wealth and strength are made, in the course of experience.

Here rationalism is instantaneously up in arms against us. I can imagine
a rationalist to talk as follows:

"Truth is not made," he will say; "it absolutely obtains, being a unique
relation that does not wait upon any process, but shoots straight over
the head of experience, and hits its reality every time. Our belief that
yon thing on the wall is a clock is true already, altho no one in
the whole history of the world should verify it. The bare quality of
standing in that transcendent relation is what makes any thought true
that possesses it, whether or not there be verification. You pragmatists
put the cart before the horse in making truth's being reside in
verification-processes. These are merely signs of its being, merely our
lame ways of ascertaining after the fact, which of our ideas already has
possessed the wondrous quality. The quality itself is timeless, like all
essences and natures. Thoughts partake of it directly, as they partake
of falsity or of irrelevancy. It can't be analyzed away into pragmatic
consequences."