But free-will has also been discussed pragmatically, and, strangely
enough, the same pragmatic interpretation has been put upon it by both
disputants. You know how large a part questions of ACCOUNTABILITY have
played in ethical controversy. To hear some persons, one would suppose
that all that ethics aims at is a code of merits and demerits. Thus does
the old legal and theological leaven, the interest in crime and sin and
punishment abide with us. 'Who's to blame? whom can we punish? whom
will God punish?'--these preoccupations hang like a bad dream over man's
religious history.

So both free-will and determinism have been inveighed against and called
absurd, because each, in the eyes of its enemies, has seemed to prevent
the 'imputability' of good or bad deeds to their authors. Queer antinomy
this! Free-will means novelty, the grafting on to the past of something
not involved therein. If our acts were predetermined, if we merely
transmitted the push of the whole past, the free-willists say, how could
we be praised or blamed for anything? We should be 'agents' only, not
'principals,' and where then would be our precious imputability and
responsibility?

But where would it be if we HAD free-will? rejoin the determinists. If a
'free' act be a sheer novelty, that comes not FROM me, the previous
me, but ex nihilo, and simply tacks itself on to me, how can _I_, the
previous I, be responsible? How can I have any permanent CHARACTER that
will stand still long enough for praise or blame to be awarded? The
chaplet of my days tumbles into a cast of disconnected beads as soon
as the thread of inner necessity is drawn out by the preposterous
indeterminist doctrine. Messrs. Fullerton and McTaggart have recently
laid about them doughtily with this argument.

It may be good ad hominem, but otherwise it is pitiful. For I ask you,
quite apart from other reasons, whether any man, woman or child, with a
sense for realities, ought not to be ashamed to plead such principles
as either dignity or imputability. Instinct and utility between them
can safely be trusted to carry on the social business of punishment and
praise. If a man does good acts we shall praise him, if he does bad acts
we shall punish him--anyhow, and quite apart from theories as to whether
the acts result from what was previous in him or are novelties in a
strict sense. To make our human ethics revolve about the question of
'merit' is a piteous unreality--God alone can know our merits, if we
have any. The real ground for supposing free-will is indeed pragmatic,
but it has nothing to do with this contemptible right to punish which
had made such a noise in past discussions of the subject.

Free-will pragmatically means NOVELTIES IN THE WORLD, the right to
expect that in its deepest elements as well as in its surface phenomena,
the future may not identically repeat and imitate the past. That
imitation en masse is there, who can deny? The general 'uniformity
of nature' is presupposed by every lesser law. But nature may be only
approximately uniform; and persons in whom knowledge of the world's past
has bred pessimism (or doubts as to the world's good character, which
become certainties if that character be supposed eternally fixed) may
naturally welcome free-will as a MELIORISTIC doctrine. It holds up
improvement as at least possible; whereas determinism assures us that
our whole notion of possibility is born of human ignorance, and that
necessity and impossibility between them rule the destinies of the
world.