There are only two points that I wish you to retain from the present
lecture. The first one relates to common sense. We have seen reason to
suspect it, to suspect that in spite of their being so venerable, of
their being so universally used and built into the very structure
of language, its categories may after all be only a collection of
extraordinarily successful hypotheses (historically discovered or
invented by single men, but gradually communicated, and used by
everybody) by which our forefathers have from time immemorial unified
and straightened the discontinuity of their immediate experiences,
and put themselves into an equilibrium with the surface of nature so
satisfactory for ordinary practical purposes that it certainly would
have lasted forever, but for the excessive intellectual vivacity of
Democritus, Archimedes, Galileo, Berkeley, and other excentric geniuses
whom the example of such men inflamed. Retain, I pray you, this
suspicion about common sense.

The other point is this. Ought not the existence of the various types of
thinking which we have reviewed, each so splendid for certain purposes,
yet all conflicting still, and neither one of them able to support a
claim of absolute veracity, to awaken a presumption favorable to the
pragmatistic view that all our theories are INSTRUMENTAL, are mental
modes of ADAPTATION to reality, rather than revelations or gnostic
answers to some divinely instituted world-enigma? I expressed this view
as clearly as I could in the second of these lectures. Certainly the
restlessness of the actual theoretic situation, the value for some
purposes of each thought-level, and the inability of either to expel the
others decisively, suggest this pragmatistic view, which I hope that the
next lectures may soon make entirely convincing. May there not after all
be a possible ambiguity in truth?

Lecture VI

Pragmatism's Conception of Truth

When Clerk Maxwell was a child it is written that he had a mania for
having everything explained to him, and that when people put him off
with vague verbal accounts of any phenomenon he would interrupt them
impatiently by saying, "Yes; but I want you to tell me the PARTICULAR GO
of it!" Had his question been about truth, only a pragmatist could
have told him the particular go of it. I believe that our contemporary
pragmatists, especially Messrs. Schiller and Dewey, have given the only
tenable account of this subject. It is a very ticklish subject, sending
subtle rootlets into all kinds of crannies, and hard to treat in the
sketchy way that alone befits a public lecture. But the Schiller-Dewey
view of truth has been so ferociously attacked by rationalistic
philosophers, and so abominably misunderstood, that here, if anywhere,
is the point where a clear and simple statement should be made.

I fully expect to see the pragmatist view of truth run through the
classic stages of a theory's career. First, you know, a new theory is
attacked as absurd; then it is admitted to be true, but obvious
and insignificant; finally it is seen to be so important that its
adversaries claim that they themselves discovered it. Our doctrine of
truth is at present in the first of these three stages, with symptoms
of the second stage having begun in certain quarters. I wish that this
lecture might help it beyond the first stage in the eyes of many of you.