See then how all these ultimate questions turn, as it were, up
their hinges; and from looking backwards upon principles, upon an
erkenntnisstheoretische Ich, a God, a Kausalitaetsprinzip, a Design, a
Free-will, taken in themselves, as something august and exalted above
facts,--see, I say, how pragmatism shifts the emphasis and looks forward
into facts themselves. The really vital question for us all is, What is
this world going to be? What is life eventually to make of itself? The
centre of gravity of philosophy must therefore alter its place. The
earth of things, long thrown into shadow by the glories of the upper
ether, must resume its rights. To shift the emphasis in this way means
that philosophic questions will fall to be treated by minds of a
less abstractionist type than heretofore, minds more scientific and
individualistic in their tone yet not irreligious either. It will be
an alteration in 'the seat of authority' that reminds one almost of the
protestant reformation. And as, to papal minds, protestantism has
often seemed a mere mess of anarchy and confusion, such, no doubt, will
pragmatism often seem to ultra-rationalist minds in philosophy. It will
seem so much sheer trash, philosophically. But life wags on, all the
same, and compasses its ends, in protestant countries. I venture to
think that philosophic protestantism will compass a not dissimilar
prosperity.

Lecture IV

The One and the Many

We saw in the last lecture that the pragmatic method, in its dealings
with certain concepts, instead of ending with admiring contemplation,
plunges forward into the river of experience with them and prolongs the
perspective by their means. Design, free-will, the absolute mind, spirit
instead of matter, have for their sole meaning a better promise as to
this world's outcome. Be they false or be they true, the meaning of them
is this meliorism. I have sometimes thought of the phenomenon called
'total reflexion' in optics as a good symbol of the relation between
abstract ideas and concrete realities, as pragmatism conceives it. Hold
a tumbler of water a little above your eyes and look up through the
water at its surface--or better still look similarly through the flat
wall of an aquarium. You will then see an extraordinarily brilliant
reflected image say of a candle-flame, or any other clear object,
situated on the opposite side of the vessel. No candle-ray, under these
circumstances gets beyond the water's surface: every ray is totally
reflected back into the depths again. Now let the water represent the
world of sensible facts, and let the air above it represent the world of
abstract ideas. Both worlds are real, of course, and interact; but they
interact only at their boundary, and the locus of everything that lives,
and happens to us, so far as full experience goes, is the water. We are
like fishes swimming in the sea of sense, bounded above by the superior
element, but unable to breathe it pure or penetrate it. We get our
oxygen from it, however, we touch it incessantly, now in this part, now
in that, and every time we touch it we are reflected back into the water
with our course re-determined and re-energized. The abstract ideas of
which the air consists, indispensable for life, but irrespirable by
themselves, as it were, and only active in their re-directing function.
All similes are halting but this one rather takes my fancy. It shows
how something, not sufficient for life in itself, may nevertheless be an
effective determinant of life elsewhere.