That is the sting of it, that in the vast driftings of the cosmic
weather, tho many a jeweled shore appears, and many an enchanted
cloud-bank floats away, long lingering ere it be dissolved--even as our
world now lingers, for our joy-yet when these transient products are
gone, nothing, absolutely NOTHING remains, of represent those particular
qualities, those elements of preciousness which they may have enshrined.
Dead and gone are they, gone utterly from the very sphere and room of
being. Without an echo; without a memory; without an influence on aught
that may come after, to make it care for similar ideals. This utter
final wreck and tragedy is of the essence of scientific materialism
as at present understood. The lower and not the higher forces are the
eternal forces, or the last surviving forces within the only cycle of
evolution which we can definitely see. Mr. Spencer believes this as much
as anyone; so why should he argue with us as if we were making silly
aesthetic objections to the 'grossness' of 'matter and motion,' the
principles of his philosophy, when what really dismays us is the
disconsolateness of its ulterior practical results?

No the true objection to materialism is not positive but negative. It
would be farcical at this day to make complaint of it for what it IS for
'grossness.' Grossness is what grossness DOES--we now know THAT. We make
complaint of it, on the contrary, for what it is NOT--not a permanent
warrant for our more ideal interests, not a fulfiller of our remotest
hopes.

The notion of God, on the other hand, however inferior it may be
in clearness to those mathematical notions so current in mechanical
philosophy, has at least this practical superiority over them, that it
guarantees an ideal order that shall be permanently preserved. A world
with a God in it to say the last word, may indeed burn up or freeze,
but we then think of him as still mindful of the old ideals and sure to
bring them elsewhere to fruition; so that, where he is, tragedy is
only provisional and partial, and shipwreck and dissolution not the
absolutely final things. This need of an eternal moral order is one
of the deepest needs of our breast. And those poets, like Dante and
Wordsworth, who live on the conviction of such an order, owe to that
fact the extraordinary tonic and consoling power of their verse. Here
then, in these different emotional and practical appeals, in these
adjustments of our concrete attitudes of hope and expectation, and all
the delicate consequences which their differences entail, lie the
real meanings of materialism and spiritualism--not in hair-splitting
abstractions about matter's inner essence, or about the metaphysical
attributes of God. Materialism means simply the denial that the moral
order is eternal, and the cutting off of ultimate hopes; spiritualism
means the affirmation of an eternal moral order and the letting loose of
hope. Surely here is an issue genuine enough, for anyone who feels
it; and, as long as men are men, it will yield matter for a serious
philosophic debate.