Our work over the details of his system is indeed what gives us our
resultant impression of the philosopher, but it is on the resultant
impression itself that we react. Expertness in philosophy is measured
by the definiteness of our summarizing reactions, by the immediate
perceptive epithet with which the expert hits such complex objects
off. But great expertness is not necessary for the epithet to come. Few
people have definitely articulated philosophies of their own. But almost
everyone has his own peculiar sense of a certain total character in
the universe, and of the inadequacy fully to match it of the peculiar
systems that he knows. They don't just cover HIS world. One will be too
dapper, another too pedantic, a third too much of a job-lot of opinions,
a fourth too morbid, and a fifth too artificial, or what not. At any
rate he and we know offhand that such philosophies are out of plumb and
out of key and out of 'whack,' and have no business to speak up in the
universe's name. Plato, Locke, Spinoza, Mill, Caird, Hegel--I prudently
avoid names nearer home!--I am sure that to many of you, my hearers,
these names are little more than reminders of as many curious personal
ways of falling short. It would be an obvious absurdity if such ways of
taking the universe were actually true. We philosophers have to reckon
with such feelings on your part. In the last resort, I repeat, it will
be by them that all our philosophies shall ultimately be judged. The
finally victorious way of looking at things will be the most completely
IMPRESSIVE way to the normal run of minds.

One word more--namely about philosophies necessarily being abstract
outlines. There are outlines and outlines, outlines of buildings
that are FAT, conceived in the cube by their planner, and outlines of
buildings invented flat on paper, with the aid of ruler and compass.
These remain skinny and emaciated even when set up in stone and mortar,
and the outline already suggests that result. An outline in itself is
meagre, truly, but it does not necessarily suggest a meagre thing. It is
the essential meagreness of WHAT IS SUGGESTED by the usual rationalistic
philosophies that moves empiricists to their gesture of rejection. The
case of Herbert Spencer's system is much to the point here. Rationalists
feel his fearful array of insufficiencies. His dry schoolmaster
temperament, the hurdy-gurdy monotony of him, his preference for
cheap makeshifts in argument, his lack of education even in mechanical
principles, and in general the vagueness of all his fundamental ideas,
his whole system wooden, as if knocked together out of cracked hemlock
boards--and yet the half of England wants to bury him in Westminster
Abbey.

Why? Why does Spencer call out so much reverence in spite of his
weakness in rationalistic eyes? Why should so many educated men who
feel that weakness, you and I perhaps, wish to see him in the Abbey
notwithstanding?

Simply because we feel his heart to be IN THE RIGHT PLACE
philosophically. His principles may be all skin and bone, but at any
rate his books try to mould themselves upon the particular shape of
this, particular world's carcase. The noise of facts resounds through
all his chapters, the citations of fact never cease, he emphasizes
facts, turns his face towards their quarter; and that is enough. It
means the right kind of thing for the empiricist mind.