MATERIAL SUBSTANCE was criticized by Berkeley with such telling effect
that his name has reverberated through all subsequent philosophy.
Berkeley's treatment of the notion of matter is so well known as to need
hardly more than a mention. So far from denying the external world which
we know, Berkeley corroborated it. It was the scholastic notion of a
material substance unapproachable by us, BEHIND the external world,
deeper and more real than it, and needed to support it, which Berkeley
maintained to be the most effective of all reducers of the external
world to unreality. Abolish that substance, he said, believe that God,
whom you can understand and approach, sends you the sensible world
directly, and you confirm the latter and back it up by his divine
authority. Berkeley's criticism of 'matter' was consequently absolutely
pragmatistic. Matter is known as our sensations of colour, figure,
hardness and the like. They are the cash-value of the term. The
difference matter makes to us by truly being is that we then get such
sensations; by not being, is that we lack them. These sensations then
are its sole meaning. Berkeley doesn't deny matter, then; he simply
tells us what it consists of. It is a true name for just so much in the
way of sensations.

Locke, and later Hume, applied a similar pragmatic criticism to the
notion of SPIRITUAL SUBSTANCE. I will only mention Locke's treatment
of our 'personal identity.' He immediately reduces this notion to its
pragmatic value in terms of experience. It means, he says, so much
consciousness,' namely the fact that at one moment of life we remember
other moments, and feel them all as parts of one and the same personal
history. Rationalism had explained this practical continuity in our life
by the unity of our soul-substance. But Locke says: suppose that God
should take away the consciousness, should WE be any the better
for having still the soul-principle? Suppose he annexed the same
consciousness to different souls, | should we, as WE realize OURSELVES,
be any the worse for that fact? In Locke's day the soul was chiefly a
thing to be rewarded or punished. See how Locke, discussing it from this
point of view, keeps the question pragmatic:

Suppose, he says, one to think himself to be the same soul that once was
Nestor or Thersites. Can he think their actions his own any more than
the actions of any other man that ever existed? But | let him once find
himself CONSCIOUS of any of the actions of Nestor, he then finds himself
the same person with Nestor. ... In this personal identity is founded
all the right and justice of reward and punishment. It may be reasonable
to think, no one shall be made to answer for what he knows nothing of,
but shall receive his doom, his consciousness accusing or excusing.
Supposing a man punished now for what he had done in another life,
whereof he could be made to have no consciousness at all, what
difference is there between that punishment and being created miserable?