The great point is to notice that the oneness and the manyness are
absolutely co-ordinate here. Neither is primordial or more essential or
excellent than the other. Just as with space, whose separating of things
seems exactly on a par with its uniting of them, but sometimes one
function and sometimes the other is what come home to us most, so,
in our general dealings with the world of influences, we now need
conductors and now need non-conductors, and wisdom lies in knowing which
is which at the appropriate moment.

4. All these systems of influence or non-influence may be listed under
the general problem of the world's CAUSAL UNITY. If the minor causal
influences among things should converge towards one common causal origin
of them in the past, one great first cause for all that is, one might
then speak of the absolute causal unity of the world. God's fiat on
creation's day has figured in traditional philosophy as such an absolute
cause and origin. Transcendental Idealism, translating 'creation' into
'thinking' (or 'willing to' think') calls the divine act 'eternal'
rather than 'first'; but the union of the many here is absolute, just
the same--the many would not BE, save for the One. Against this notion
of the unity of origin of all there has always stood the pluralistic
notion of an eternal self-existing many in the shape of atoms or even of
spiritual units of some sort. The alternative has doubtless a pragmatic
meaning, but perhaps, as far as these lectures go, we had better leave
the question of unity of origin unsettled.

5. The most important sort of union that obtains among things,
pragmatically speaking, is their GENERIC UNITY. Things exist in kinds,
there are many specimens in each kind, and what the 'kind' implies for
one specimen, it implies also for every other specimen of that kind. We
can easily conceive that every fact in the world might be singular,
that is, unlike any other fact and sole of its kind. In such a world of
singulars our logic would be useless, for logic works by predicating
of the single instance what is true of all its kind. With no two
things alike in the world, we should be unable to reason from our past
experiences to our future ones. The existence of so much generic unity
in things is thus perhaps the most momentous pragmatic specification of
what it may mean to say 'the world is One.' ABSOLUTE generic unity would
obtain if there were one summum genus under which all things without
exception could be eventually subsumed. 'Beings,' 'thinkables,'
'experiences,' would be candidates for this position. Whether the
alternatives expressed by such words have any pragmatic significance or
not, is another question which I prefer to leave unsettled just now.