Not BEING reality, but only our belief ABOUT reality, it will contain
human elements, but these will KNOW the non-human element, in the only
sense in which there can be knowledge of anything. Does the river make
its banks, or do the banks make the river? Does a man walk with his
right leg or with his left leg more essentially? Just as impossible may
it be to separate the real from the human factors in the growth of our
cognitive experience.

Let this stand as a first brief indication of the humanistic position.
Does it seem paradoxical? If so, I will try to make it plausible by a
few illustrations, which will lead to a fuller acquaintance with the
subject.

In many familiar objects everyone will recognize the human element. We
conceive a given reality in this way or in that, to suit our purpose,
and the reality passively submits to the conception. You can take the
number 27 as the cube of 3, or as the product of 3 and 9, or as 26 PLUS
1, or 100 MINUS 73, or in countless other ways, of which one will be
just as true as another. You can take a chessboard as black squares on
a white ground, or as white squares on a black ground, and neither
conception is a false one. You can treat the adjoined figure [Figure of
a 'Star of David'] as a star, as two big triangles crossing each other,
as a hexagon with legs set up on its angles, as six equal triangles
hanging together by their tips, etc. All these treatments are true
treatments--the sensible THAT upon the paper resists no one of them. You
can say of a line that it runs east, or you can say that it runs west,
and the line per se accepts both descriptions without rebelling at the
inconsistency.

We carve out groups of stars in the heavens, and call them
constellations, and the stars patiently suffer us to do so--tho if they
knew what we were doing, some of them might feel much surprised at the
partners we had given them. We name the same constellation diversely, as
Charles's Wain, the Great Bear, or the Dipper. None of the names will be
false, and one will be as true as another, for all are applicable.

In all these cases we humanly make an addition to some sensible reality,
and that reality tolerates the addition. All the additions 'agree' with
the reality; they fit it, while they build it out. No one of them is
false. Which may be treated as the more true, depends altogether on
the human use of it. If the 27 is a number of dollars which I find in
a drawer where I had left 28, it is 28 minus 1. If it is the number of
inches in a shelf which I wish to insert into a cupboard 26 inches wide,
it is 26 plus 1. If I wish to ennoble the heavens by the constellations
I see there, 'Charles's Wain' would be more true than 'Dipper.' My
friend Frederick Myers was humorously indignant that that prodigious
star-group should remind us Americans of nothing but a culinary utensil.