"All realities influence our practice," he wrote me, "and that influence
is their meaning for us. I am accustomed to put questions to my classes
in this way: In what respects would the world be different if this
alternative or that were true? If I can find nothing that would become
different, then the alternative has no sense."

That is, the rival views mean practically the same thing, and meaning,
other than practical, there is for us none. Ostwald in a published
lecture gives this example of what he means. Chemists have long wrangled
over the inner constitution of certain bodies called 'tautomerous.'
Their properties seemed equally consistent with the notion that an
instable hydrogen atom oscillates inside of them, or that they are
instable mixtures of two bodies. Controversy raged; but never was
decided. "It would never have begun," says Ostwald, "if the combatants
had asked themselves what particular experimental fact could have been
made different by one or the other view being correct. For it would then
have appeared that no difference of fact could possibly ensue; and the
quarrel was as unreal as if, theorizing in primitive times about the
raising of dough by yeast, one party should have invoked a 'brownie,'
while another insisted on an 'elf' as the true cause of the phenomenon."
[Footnote: 'Theorie und Praxis,' Zeitsch. des Oesterreichischen
Ingenieur u. Architecten-Vereines, 1905, Nr. 4 u. 6. I find a still
more radical pragmatism than Ostwald's in an address by Professor W.
S. Franklin: "I think that the sickliest notion of physics, even if a
student gets it, is that it is 'the science of masses, molecules and the
ether.' And I think that the healthiest notion, even if a student does
not wholly get it, is that physics is the science of the ways of taking
hold of bodies and pushing them!" (Science, January 2, 1903.)]

It is astonishing to see how many philosophical disputes collapse
into insignificance the moment you subject them to this simple test of
tracing a concrete consequence. There can BE no difference any-where
that doesn't MAKE a difference elsewhere--no difference in abstract
truth that doesn't express itself in a difference in concrete fact and
in conduct consequent upon that fact, imposed on somebody, somehow,
somewhere and somewhen. The whole function of philosophy ought to be
to find out what definite difference it will make to you and me,
at definite instants of our life, if this world-formula or that
world-formula be the true one.

There is absolutely nothing new in the pragmatic method. Socrates was
an adept at it. Aristotle used it methodically. Locke, Berkeley and Hume
made momentous contributions to truth by its means. Shadworth Hodgson
keeps insisting that realities are only what they are 'known-as.'
But these forerunners of pragmatism used it in fragments: they were
preluders only. Not until in our time has it generalized itself, become
conscious of a universal mission, pretended to a conquering destiny. I
believe in that destiny, and I hope I may end by inspiring you with my
belief.