The most fateful point of difference between being a rationalist and
being a pragmatist is now fully in sight. Experience is in mutation,
and our psychological ascertainments of truth are in mutation--so much
rationalism will allow; but never that either reality itself or truth
itself is mutable. Reality stands complete and ready-made from all
eternity, rationalism insists, and the agreement of our ideas with it
is that unique unanalyzable virtue in them of which she has already told
us. As that intrinsic excellence, their truth has nothing to do with our
experiences. It adds nothing to the content of experience. It makes
no difference to reality itself; it is supervenient, inert, static, a
reflexion merely. It doesn't EXIST, it HOLDS or OBTAINS, it belongs to
another dimension from that of either facts or fact-relations, belongs,
in short, to the epistemological dimension--and with that big word
rationalism closes the discussion.

Thus, just as pragmatism faces forward to the future, so does
rationalism here again face backward to a past eternity. True to her
inveterate habit, rationalism reverts to 'principles,' and thinks that
when an abstraction once is named, we own an oracular solution.

The tremendous pregnancy in the way of consequences for life of this
radical difference of outlook will only become apparent in my later
lectures. I wish meanwhile to close this lecture by showing that
rationalism's sublimity does not save it from inanity.

When, namely, you ask rationalists, instead of accusing pragmatism
of desecrating the notion of truth, to define it themselves by saying
exactly what THEY understand by it, the only positive attempts I can
think of are these two:

1. "Truth is just the system of propositions which have an
un-conditional claim to be recognized as valid." [Footnote: A. E.
Taylor, Philosophical Review, vol. xiv, p. 288.]

2. Truth is a name for all those judgments which we find ourselves under
obligation to make by a kind of imperative duty. [Footnote: H.
Rickert, Der Gegenstand der Erkenntniss, chapter on 'Die
Urtheilsnothwendigkeit.']

The first thing that strikes one in such definitions is their
unutterable triviality. They are absolutely true, of course, but
absolutely insignificant until you handle them pragmatically. What do
you mean by 'claim' here, and what do you mean by 'duty'? As
summary names for the concrete reasons why thinking in true ways is
overwhelmingly expedient and good for mortal men, it is all right to
talk of claims on reality's part to be agreed with, and of obligations
on our part to agree. We feel both the claims and the obligations, and
we feel them for just those reasons.

But the rationalists who talk of claim and obligation EXPRESSLY SAY
THAT THEY HAVE NOTHING TO DO WITH OUR PRACTICAL INTERESTS OR PERSONAL
REASONS. Our reasons for agreeing are psychological facts, they say,
relative to each thinker, and to the accidents of his life. They are his
evidence merely, they are no part of the life of truth itself. That
life transacts itself in a purely logical or epistemological, as
distinguished from a psychological, dimension, and its claims antedate
and exceed all personal motivations whatsoever. Tho neither man nor God
should ever ascertain truth, the word would still have to be defined as
that which OUGHT to be ascertained and recognized.

There never was a more exquisite example of an idea abstracted from the
concretes of experience and then used to oppose and negate what it was
abstracted from.