The 'possible,' as something less than the actual and more than the
wholly unreal, is another of these magisterial notions of common sense.
Criticize them as you may, they persist; and we fly back to them the
moment critical pressure is relaxed. 'Self,' 'body,' in the substantial
or metaphysical sense--no one escapes subjection to THOSE forms
of thought. In practice, the common-sense DENKMITTEL are uniformly
victorious. Everyone, however instructed, still thinks of a 'thing' in
the common-sense way, as a permanent unit-subject that 'supports' its
attributes interchangeably. No one stably or sincerely uses the more
critical notion, of a group of sense-qualities united by a law. With
these categories in our hand, we make our plans and plot together, and
connect all the remoter parts of experience with what lies before our
eyes. Our later and more critical philosophies are mere fads and fancies
compared with this natural mother-tongue of thought.

Common sense appears thus as a perfectly definite stage in our
understanding of things, a stage that satisfies in an extraordinarily
successful way the purposes for which we think. 'Things' do exist, even
when we do not see them. Their 'kinds' also exist. Their 'qualities' are
what they act by, and are what we act on; and these also exist. These
lamps shed their quality of light on every object in this room. We
intercept IT on its way whenever we hold up an opaque screen. It is
the very sound that my lips emit that travels into your ears. It is the
sensible heat of the fire that migrates into the water in which we boil
an egg; and we can change the heat into coolness by dropping in a
lump of ice. At this stage of philosophy all non-European men without
exception have remained. It suffices for all the necessary practical
ends of life; and, among our own race even, it is only the highly
sophisticated specimens, the minds debauched by learning, as Berkeley
calls them, who have ever even suspected common sense of not being
absolutely true.

But when we look back, and speculate as to how the common-sense
categories may have achieved their wonderful supremacy, no reason
appears why it may not have been by a process just like that by which
the conceptions due to Democritus, Berkeley, or Darwin, achieved their
similar triumphs in more recent times. In other words, they may have
been successfully DISCOVERED by prehistoric geniuses whose names the
night of antiquity has covered up; they may have been verified by the
immediate facts of experience which they first fitted; and then from
fact to fact and from man to man they may have SPREAD, until all
language rested on them and we are now incapable of thinking naturally
in any other terms. Such a view would only follow the rule that has
proved elsewhere so fertile, of assuming the vast and remote to conform
to the laws of formation that we can observe at work in the small and
near.