After discussing the unity of the universe in this pragmatic way, you
ought to see why I said in my second lecture, borrowing the word from my
friend G. Papini, that pragmatism tends to UNSTIFFEN all our theories.
The world's oneness has generally been affirmed abstractly only, and as
if anyone who questioned it must be an idiot. The temper of monists has
been so vehement, as almost at times to be convulsive; and this way of
holding a doctrine does not easily go with reasonable discussion and the
drawing of distinctions. The theory of the Absolute, in particular, has
had to be an article of faith, affirmed dogmatically and exclusively.
The One and All, first in the order of being and of knowing, logically
necessary itself, and uniting all lesser things in the bonds of mutual
necessity, how could it allow of any mitigation of its inner
rigidity? The slightest suspicion of pluralism, the minutest wiggle of
independence of any one of its parts from the control of the totality,
would ruin it. Absolute unity brooks no degrees--as well might you claim
absolute purity for a glass of water because it contains but a single
little cholera-germ. The independence, however infinitesimal, of a part,
however small, would be to the Absolute as fatal as a cholera-germ.

Pluralism on the other hand has no need of this dogmatic rigoristic
temper. Provided you grant SOME separation among things, some tremor of
independence, some free play of parts on one another, some real novelty
or chance, however minute, she is amply satisfied, and will allow you
any amount, however great, of real union. How much of union there may
be is a question that she thinks can only be decided empirically. The
amount may be enormous, colossal; but absolute monism is shattered if,
along with all the union, there has to be granted the slightest modicum,
the most incipient nascency, or the most residual trace, of a separation
that is not 'overcome.'

Pragmatism, pending the final empirical ascertainment of just what the
balance of union and disunion among things may be, must obviously range
herself upon the pluralistic side. Some day, she admits, even total
union, with one knower, one origin, and a universe consolidated in
every conceivable way, may turn out to be the most acceptable of all
hypotheses. Meanwhile the opposite hypothesis, of a world imperfectly
unified still, and perhaps always to remain so, must be sincerely
entertained. This latter hypothesis is pluralism's doctrine. Since
absolute monism forbids its being even considered seriously, branding it
as irrational from the start, it is clear that pragmatism must turn its
back on absolute monism, and follow pluralism's more empirical path.

This leaves us with the common-sense world, in which we find things
partly joined and partly disjoined. 'Things,' then, and their
'conjunctions'--what do such words mean, pragmatically handled? In
my next lecture, I will apply the pragmatic method to the stage of
philosophizing known as Common Sense.

Lecture V

Pragmatism and Common Sense

In the last lecture we turned ourselves from the usual way of talking
of the universe's oneness as a principle, sublime in all its blankness,
towards a study of the special kinds of union which the universe
enfolds. We found many of these to coexist with kinds of separation
equally real. "How far am I verified?" is the question which each
kind of union and each kind of separation asks us here, so as good
pragmatists we have to turn our face towards experience, towards
'facts.'