3. There are innumerable other paths of practical continuity among
things. Lines of INFLUENCE can be traced by which they together.
Following any such line you pass from one thing to another till you
may have covered a good part of the universe's extent. Gravity and
heat-conduction are such all-uniting influences, so far as the physical
world goes. Electric, luminous and chemical influences follow similar
lines of influence. But opaque and inert bodies interrupt the continuity
here, so that you have to step round them, or change your mode of
progress if you wish to get farther on that day. Practically, you have
then lost your universe's unity, SO FAR AS IT WAS CONSTITUTED BY THOSE
FIRST LINES OF INFLUENCE. There are innumerable kinds of connexion that
special things have with other special things; and the ENSEMBLE of any
one of these connexions forms one sort of system by which things are
conjoined. Thus men are conjoined in a vast network of ACQUAINTANCESHIP.
Brown knows Jones, Jones knows Robinson, etc.; and BY CHOOSING YOUR
FARTHER INTERMEDIARIES RIGHTLY you may carry a message from Jones to the
Empress of China, or the Chief of the African Pigmies, or to anyone
else in the inhabited world. But you are stopped short, as by a
non-conductor, when you choose one man wrong in this experiment. What
may be called love-systems are grafted on the acquaintance-system. A
loves (or hates) B; B loves (or hates) C, etc. But these systems are
smaller than the great acquaintance-system that they presuppose.

Human efforts are daily unifying the world more and more in definite
systematic ways. We found colonial, postal, consular, commercial
systems, all the parts of which obey definite influences that propagate
themselves within the system but not to facts outside of it. The result
is innumerable little hangings-together of the world's parts within the
larger hangings-together, little worlds, not only of discourse but of
operation, within the wider universe. Each system exemplifies one type
or grade of union, its parts being strung on that peculiar kind of
relation, and the same part may figure in many different systems, as
a man may hold several offices and belong to various clubs. From this
'systematic' point of view, therefore, the pragmatic value of the
world's unity is that all these definite networks actually and
practically exist. Some are more enveloping and extensive, some less so;
they are superposed upon each other; and between them all they let no
individual elementary part of the universe escape. Enormous as is the
amount of disconnexion among things (for these systematic influences and
conjunctions follow rigidly exclusive paths), everything that exists is
influenced in SOME way by something else, if you can only pick the way
out rightly Loosely speaking, and in general, it may be said that all
things cohere and adhere to each other SOMEHOW, and that the universe
exists practically in reticulated or concatenated forms which make of
it a continuous or 'integrated' affair. Any kind of influence whatever
helps to make the world one, so far as you can follow it from next
to next. You may then say that 'the world IS One'--meaning in these
respects, namely, and just so far as they obtain. But just as definitely
is it NOT one, so far as they do not obtain; and there is no species of
connexion which will not fail, if, instead of choosing conductors for
it, you choose non-conductors. You are then arrested at your very
first step and have to write the world down as a pure MANY from that
particular point of view. If our intellect had been as much interested
in disjunctive as it is in conjunctive relations, philosophy would have
equally successfully celebrated the world's DISUNION.