Pragmatism represents a perfectly familiar attitude in philosophy, the
empiricist attitude, but it represents it, as it seems to me, both in
a more radical and in a less objectionable form than it has ever yet
assumed. A pragmatist turns his back resolutely and once for all upon
a lot of inveterate habits dear to professional philosophers. He turns
away from abstraction and insufficiency, from verbal solutions, from bad
a priori reasons, from fixed principles, closed systems, and pretended
absolutes and origins. He turns towards concreteness and adequacy,
towards facts, towards action, and towards power. That means the
empiricist temper regnant, and the rationalist temper sincerely given
up. It means the open air and possibilities of nature, as against dogma,
artificiality and the pretence of finality in truth.

At the same time it does not stand for any special results. It is
a method only. But the general triumph of that method would mean an
enormous change in what I called in my last lecture the 'temperament'
of philosophy. Teachers of the ultra-rationalistic type would be frozen
out, much as the courtier type is frozen out in republics, as the
ultramontane type of priest is frozen out in protestant lands. Science
and metaphysics would come much nearer together, would in fact work
absolutely hand in hand.

Metaphysics has usually followed a very primitive kind of quest. You
know how men have always hankered after unlawful magic, and you know
what a great part, in magic, WORDS have always played. If you have his
name, or the formula of incantation that binds him, you can control the
spirit, genie, afrite, or whatever the power may be. Solomon knew the
names of all the spirits, and having their names, he held them subject
to his will. So the universe has always appeared to the natural mind as
a kind of enigma, of which the key must be sought in the shape of
some illuminating or power-bringing word or name. That word names the
universe's PRINCIPLE, and to possess it is, after a fashion, to
possess the universe itself. 'God,' 'Matter,' 'Reason,' 'the Absolute,'
'Energy,' are so many solving names. You can rest when you have them.
You are at the end of your metaphysical quest.

But if you follow the pragmatic method, you cannot look on any such word
as closing your quest. You must bring out of each word its practical
cash-value, set it at work within the stream of your experience. It
appears less as a solution, then, than as a program for more work,
and more particularly as an indication of the ways in which existing
realities may be CHANGED.

THEORIES THUS BECOME INSTRUMENTS, NOT ANSWERS TO ENIGMAS, IN WHICH
WE CAN REST. We don't lie back upon them, we move forward, and, on
occasion, make nature over again by their aid. Pragmatism unstiffens all
our theories, limbers them up and sets each one at work. Being nothing
essentially new, it harmonizes with many ancient philosophic tendencies.
It agrees with nominalism for instance, in always appealing to
particulars; with utilitarianism in emphasizing practical aspects; with
positivism in its disdain for verbal solutions, useless questions, and
metaphysical abstractions.