Our personal identity, then, consists, for Locke, solely in
pragmatically definable particulars. Whether, apart from these
verifiable facts, it also inheres in a spiritual principle, is a merely
curious speculation. Locke, compromiser that he was, passively tolerated
the belief in a substantial soul behind our consciousness. But his
successor Hume, and most empirical psychologists after him, have denied
the soul, save as the name for verifiable cohesions in our inner life.
They redescend into the stream of experience with it, and cash it into
so much small-change value in the way of 'ideas' and their peculiar
connexions with each other. As I said of Berkeley's matter, the soul is
good or 'true' for just SO MUCH, but no more.

The mention of material substance naturally suggests the doctrine of
'materialism,' but philosophical materialism is not necessarily knit
up with belief in 'matter,' as a metaphysical principle. One may
deny matter in that sense, as strongly as Berkeley did, one may be a
phenomenalist like Huxley, and yet one may still be a materialist in the
wider sense, of explaining higher phenomena by lower ones, and leaving
the destinies of the world at the mercy of its blinder parts and forces.
It is in this wider sense of the word that materialism is opposed to
spiritualism or theism. The laws of physical nature are what run things,
materialism says. The highest productions of human genius might be
ciphered by one who had complete acquaintance with the facts, out of
their physiological conditions, regardless whether nature be there only
for our minds, as idealists contend, or not. Our minds in any case would
have to record the kind of nature it is, and write it down as operating
through blind laws of physics. This is the complexion of present day
materialism, which may better be called naturalism. Over against it
stands 'theism,' or what in a wide sense may be termed 'spiritualism.'
Spiritualism says that mind not only witnesses and records things, but
also runs and operates them: the world being thus guided, not by its
lower, but by its higher element.

Treated as it often is, this question becomes little more than a
conflict between aesthetic preferences. Matter is gross, coarse, crass,
muddy; spirit is pure, elevated, noble; and since it is more consonant
with the dignity of the universe to give the primacy in it to what
appears superior, spirit must be affirmed as the ruling principle. To
treat abstract principles as finalities, before which our intellects
may come to rest in a state of admiring contemplation, is the great
rationalist failing. Spiritualism, as often held, may be simply a
state of admiration for one kind, and of dislike for another kind,
of abstraction. I remember a worthy spiritualist professor who always
referred to materialism as the 'mud-philosophy,' and deemed it thereby
refuted.

To such spiritualism as this there is an easy answer, and Mr. Spencer
makes it effectively. In some well-written pages at the end of the
first volume of his Psychology he shows us that a 'matter' so infinitely
subtile, and performing motions as inconceivably quick and fine as those
which modern science postulates in her explanations, has no trace of
grossness left. He shows that the conception of spirit, as we mortals
hitherto have framed it, is itself too gross to cover the exquisite
tenuity of nature's facts. Both terms, he says, are but symbols,
pointing to that one unknowable reality in which their oppositions
cease.