The SECOND part of reality, as something that our beliefs must also
obediently take account of, is the RELATIONS that obtain between our
sensations or between their copies in our minds. This part falls into
two sub-parts: 1) the relations that are mutable and accidental, as
those of date and place; and 2) those that are fixed and essential
because they are grounded on the inner natures of their terms--such as
likeness and unlikeness. Both sorts of relation are matters of immediate
perception. Both are 'facts.' But it is the latter kind of fact that
forms the more important sub-part of reality for our theories of
knowledge. Inner relations namely are 'eternal,' are perceived whenever
their sensible terms are compared; and of them our thought--mathematical
and logical thought, so-called--must eternally take account.

The THIRD part of reality, additional to these perceptions (tho largely
based upon them), is the PREVIOUS TRUTHS of which every new inquiry
takes account. This third part is a much less obdurately resisting
factor: it often ends by giving way. In speaking of these three portions
of reality as at all times controlling our belief's formation, I am only
reminding you of what we heard in our last hour.

Now however fixed these elements of reality may be, we still have a
certain freedom in our dealings with them. Take our sensations. THAT
they are is undoubtedly beyond our control; but WHICH we attend to,
note, and make emphatic in our conclusions depends on our own interests;
and, according as we lay the emphasis here or there, quite different
formulations of truth result. We read the same facts differently.
'Waterloo,' with the same fixed details, spells a 'victory' for an
englishman; for a frenchman it spells a 'defeat.' So, for an optimist
philosopher the universe spells victory, for a pessimist, defeat.

What we say about reality thus depends on the perspective into which we
throw it. The THAT of it is its own; but the WHAT depends on the WHICH;
and the which depends on US. Both the sensational and the relational
parts of reality are dumb: they say absolutely nothing about themselves.
We it is who have to speak for them. This dumbness of sensations has
led such intellectualists as T.H. Green and Edward Caird to shove them
almost beyond the pale of philosophic recognition, but pragmatists
refuse to go so far. A sensation is rather like a client who has given
his case to a lawyer and then has passively to listen in the courtroom
to whatever account of his affairs, pleasant or unpleasant, the lawyer
finds it most expedient to give.

Hence, even in the field of sensation, our minds exert a certain
arbitrary choice. By our inclusions and omissions we trace the field's
extent; by our emphasis we mark its foreground and its background; by
our order we read it in this direction or in that. We receive in short
the block of marble, but we carve the statue ourselves.

This applies to the 'eternal' parts of reality as well: we shuffle our
perceptions of intrinsic relation and arrange them just as freely. We
read them in one serial order or another, class them in this way or
in that, treat one or the other as more fundamental, until our beliefs
about them form those bodies of truth known as logics, geometries, or
arithmetics, in each and all of which the form and order in which the
whole is cast is flagrantly man-made.