All these, you see, are ANTI-INTELLECTUALIST tendencies. Against
rationalism as a pretension and a method, pragmatism is fully armed
and militant. But, at the outset, at least, it stands for no particular
results. It has no dogmas, and no doctrines save its method. As the
young Italian pragmatist Papini has well said, it lies in the midst of
our theories, like a corridor in a hotel. Innumerable chambers open out
of it. In one you may find a man writing an atheistic volume; in the
next someone on his knees praying for faith and strength; in a third
a chemist investigating a body's properties. In a fourth a system
of idealistic metaphysics is being excogitated; in a fifth the
impossibility of metaphysics is being shown. But they all own the
corridor, and all must pass through it if they want a practicable way of
getting into or out of their respective rooms.

No particular results then, so far, but only an attitude of orientation,
is what the pragmatic method means. THE ATTITUDE OF LOOKING AWAY FROM
FIRST THINGS, PRINCIPLES, 'CATEGORIES,' SUPPOSED NECESSITIES; AND OF
LOOKING TOWARDS LAST THINGS, FRUITS, CONSEQUENCES, FACTS.

So much for the pragmatic method! You may say that I have been praising
it rather than explaining it to you, but I shall presently explain it
abundantly enough by showing how it works on some familiar problems.
Meanwhile the word pragmatism has come to be used in a still wider
sense, as meaning also a certain theory of TRUTH. I mean to give a whole
lecture to the statement of that theory, after first paving the way,
so I can be very brief now. But brevity is hard to follow, so I ask
for your redoubled attention for a quarter of an hour. If much remains
obscure, I hope to make it clearer in the later lectures.

One of the most successfully cultivated branches of philosophy in our
time is what is called inductive logic, the study of the conditions
under which our sciences have evolved. Writers on this subject have
begun to show a singular unanimity as to what the laws of nature and
elements of fact mean, when formulated by mathematicians, physicists and
chemists. When the first mathematical, logical and natural uniformities,
the first LAWS, were discovered, men were so carried away by the
clearness, beauty and simplification that resulted, that they believed
themselves to have deciphered authentically the eternal thoughts of the
Almighty. His mind also thundered and reverberated in syllogisms.
He also thought in conic sections, squares and roots and ratios, and
geometrized like Euclid. He made Kepler's laws for the planets to
follow; he made velocity increase proportionally to the time in falling
bodies; he made the law of the sines for light to obey when refracted;
he established the classes, orders, families and genera of plants and
animals, and fixed the distances between them. He thought the archetypes
of all things, and devised their variations; and when we rediscover any
one of these his wondrous institutions, we seize his mind in its very
literal intention.