In this present hour I wish to illustrate the pragmatic method by one
more application. I wish to turn its light upon the ancient problem
of 'the one and the many.' I suspect that in but few of you has this
problem occasioned sleepless nights, and I should not be astonished if
some of you told me it had never vexed you. I myself have come, by long
brooding over it, to consider it the most central of all philosophic
problems, central because so pregnant. I mean by this that if you know
whether a man is a decided monist or a decided pluralist, you perhaps
know more about the rest of his opinions than if you give him any other
name ending in IST. To believe in the one or in the many, that is the
classification with the maximum number of consequences. So bear with
me for an hour while I try to inspire you with my own interest in the
problem.

Philosophy has often been defined as the quest or the vision of the
world's unity. We never hear this definition challenged, and it is true
as far as it goes, for philosophy has indeed manifested above all things
its interest in unity. But how about the VARIETY in things? Is that such
an irrelevant matter? If instead of using the term philosophy, we talk
in general of our intellect and its needs we quickly see that unity
is only one of these. Acquaintance with the details of fact is always
reckoned, along with their reduction to system, as an indispensable
mark of mental greatness. Your 'scholarly' mind, of encyclopedic,
philological type, your man essentially of learning, has never lacked
for praise along with your philosopher. What our intellect really aims
at is neither variety nor unity taken singly but totality.[Footnote:
Compare A. Bellanger: Les concepts de Cause, et l'activite intentionelle
de l'Esprit. Paris, Alcan, 1905, p. 79 ff.] In this, acquaintance with
reality's diversities is as important as understanding their connexion.
The human passion of curiosity runs on all fours with the systematizing
passion.

In spite of this obvious fact the unity of things has always been
considered more illustrious, as it were, than their variety. When a
young man first conceives the notion that the whole world forms
one great fact, with all its parts moving abreast, as it were, and
interlocked, he feels as if he were enjoying a great insight, and looks
superciliously on all who still fall short of this sublime conception.
Taken thus abstractly as it first comes to one, the monistic insight is
so vague as hardly to seem worth defending intellectually. Yet probably
everyone in this audience in some way cherishes it. A certain abstract
monism, a certain emotional response to the character of oneness, as
if it were a feature of the world not coordinate with its manyness, but
vastly more excellent and eminent, is so prevalent in educated circles
that we might almost call it a part of philosophic common sense. Of
COURSE the world is one, we say. How else could it be a world at all?
Empiricists as a rule, are as stout monists of this abstract kind as
rationalists are.

The difference is that the empiricists are less dazzled. Unity doesn't
blind them to everything else, doesn't quench their curiosity for
special facts, whereas there is a kind of rationalist who is sure to
interpret abstract unity mystically and to forget everything else, to
treat it as a principle; to admire and worship it; and thereupon to come
to a full stop intellectually.