I tell this trivial anecdote because it is a peculiarly simple example
of what I wish now to speak of as THE PRAGMATIC METHOD. The pragmatic
method is primarily a method of settling metaphysical disputes that
otherwise might be interminable. Is the world one or many?--fated or
free?--material or spiritual?--here are notions either of which may
or may not hold good of the world; and disputes over such notions are
unending. The pragmatic method in such cases is to try to interpret each
notion by tracing its respective practical consequences. What difference
would it practically make to anyone if this notion rather than that
notion were true? If no practical difference whatever can be traced,
then the alternatives mean practically the same thing, and all dispute
is idle. Whenever a dispute is serious, we ought to be able to show some
practical difference that must follow from one side or the other's being
right.

A glance at the history of the idea will show you still better what
pragmatism means. The term is derived from the same Greek word [pi rho
alpha gamma mu alpha], meaning action, from which our words 'practice'
and 'practical' come. It was first introduced into philosophy by Mr.
Charles Peirce in 1878. In an article entitled 'How to Make Our Ideas
Clear,' in the 'Popular Science Monthly' for January of that year
[Footnote: Translated in the Revue Philosophique for January, 1879 (vol.
vii).] Mr. Peirce, after pointing out that our beliefs are really rules
for action, said that to develope a thought's meaning, we need only
determine what conduct it is fitted to produce: that conduct is for
us its sole significance. And the tangible fact at the root of all our
thought-distinctions, however subtle, is that there is no one of them so
fine as to consist in anything but a possible difference of practice.
To attain perfect clearness in our thoughts of an object, then, we need
only consider what conceivable effects of a practical kind the object
may involve--what sensations we are to expect from it, and what
reactions we must prepare. Our conception of these effects, whether
immediate or remote, is then for us the whole of our conception of the
object, so far as that conception has positive significance at all.

This is the principle of Peirce, the principle of pragmatism. It lay
entirely unnoticed by anyone for twenty years, until I, in an address
before Professor Howison's philosophical union at the university of
California, brought it forward again and made a special application
of it to religion. By that date (1898) the times seemed ripe for its
reception. The word 'pragmatism' spread, and at present it fairly
spots the pages of the philosophic journals. On all hands we find the
'pragmatic movement' spoken of, sometimes with respect, sometimes with
contumely, seldom with clear understanding. It is evident that the term
applies itself conveniently to a number of tendencies that hitherto have
lacked a collective name, and that it has 'come to stay.'

To take in the importance of Peirce's principle, one must get accustomed
to applying it to concrete cases. I found a few years ago that Ostwald,
the illustrious Leipzig chemist, had been making perfectly distinct
use of the principle of pragmatism in his lectures on the philosophy of
science, tho he had not called it by that name.