These two systems are what you have to choose between if you turn to the
tender-minded school. And if you are the lovers of facts I have
supposed you to be, you find the trail of the serpent of rationalism, of
intellectualism, over everything that lies on that side of the line. You
escape indeed the materialism that goes with the reigning empiricism;
but you pay for your escape by losing contact with the concrete parts
of life. The more absolutistic philosophers dwell on so high a level
of abstraction that they never even try to come down. The absolute mind
which they offer us, the mind that makes our universe by thinking it,
might, for aught they show us to the contrary, have made any one of a
million other universes just as well as this. You can deduce no single
actual particular from the notion of it. It is compatible with any state
of things whatever being true here below. And the theistic God is almost
as sterile a principle. You have to go to the world which he has created
to get any inkling of his actual character: he is the kind of god that
has once for all made that kind of a world. The God of the theistic
writers lives on as purely abstract heights as does the Absolute.
Absolutism has a certain sweep and dash about it, while the usual theism
is more insipid, but both are equally remote and vacuous. What you want
is a philosophy that will not only exercise your powers of intellectual
abstraction, but that will make some positive connexion with this actual
world of finite human lives.

You want a system that will combine both things, the scientific
loyalty to facts and willingness to take account of them, the spirit of
adaptation and accommodation, in short, but also the old confidence in
human values and the resultant spontaneity, whether of the religious or
of the romantic type. And this is then your dilemma: you find the two
parts of your quaesitum hopelessly separated. You find empiricism with
inhumanism and irreligion; or else you find a rationalistic philosophy
that indeed may call itself religious, but that keeps out of all
definite touch with concrete facts and joys and sorrows.

I am not sure how many of you live close enough to philosophy to realize
fully what I mean by this last reproach, so I will dwell a little longer
on that unreality in all rationalistic systems by which your serious
believer in facts is so apt to feel repelled.