Our critics certainly need more imagination of realities. I have
honestly tried to stretch my own imagination and to read the best
possible meaning into the rationalist conception, but I have to confess
that it still completely baffles me. The notion of a reality calling on
us to 'agree' with it, and that for no reasons, but simply because
its claim is 'unconditional' or 'transcendent,' is one that I can make
neither head nor tail of. I try to imagine myself as the sole reality
in the world, and then to imagine what more I would 'claim' if I were
allowed to. If you suggest the possibility of my claiming that a mind
should come into being from out of the void inane and stand and COPY me,
I can indeed imagine what the copying might mean, but I can conjure up
no motive. What good it would do me to be copied, or what good it would
do that mind to copy me, if farther consequences are expressly and
in principle ruled out as motives for the claim (as they are by our
rationalist authorities) I cannot fathom. When the Irishman's admirers
ran him along to the place of banquet in a sedan chair with no bottom,
he said, "Faith, if it wasn't for the honor of the thing, I might as
well have come on foot." So here: but for the honor of the thing, I
might as well have remained uncopied. Copying is one genuine mode
of knowing (which for some strange reason our contemporary
transcendentalists seem to be tumbling over each other to repudiate);
but when we get beyond copying, and fall back on unnamed forms of
agreeing that are expressly denied to be either copyings or leadings or
fittings, or any other processes pragmatically definable, the WHAT of
the 'agreement' claimed becomes as unintelligible as the why of it.
Neither content nor motive can be imagined for it. It is an absolutely
meaningless abstraction. [Footnote: I am not forgetting that Professor
Rickert long ago gave up the whole notion of truth being founded on
agreement with reality. Reality, according to him, is whatever agrees
with truth, and truth is founded solely on our primal duty. This
fantastic flight, together with Mr. Joachim's candid confession of
failure in his book The Nature of Truth, seems to me to mark the
bankruptcy of rationalism when dealing with this subject. Rickert deals
with part of the pragmatistic position under the head of what he calls
'Relativismus.' I cannot discuss his text here. Suffice it to say
that his argumentation in that chapter is so feeble as to seem almost
incredible in so generally able a writer.]

Surely in this field of truth it is the pragmatists and not the
rationalists who are the more genuine defenders of the universe's
rationality.

Lecture VII

Pragmatism and Humanism