But most possibles are not bare, they are concretely grounded, or
well-grounded, as we say. What does this mean pragmatically? It means,
not only that there are no preventive conditions present, but that some
of the conditions of production of the possible thing actually are here.
Thus a concretely possible chicken means: (1) that the idea of chicken
contains no essential self-contradiction; (2) that no boys, skunks, or
other enemies are about; and (3) that at least an actual egg exists.
Possible chicken means actual egg--plus actual sitting hen, or
incubator, or what not. As the actual conditions approach completeness
the chicken becomes a better-and-better-grounded possibility. When the
conditions are entirely complete, it ceases to be a possibility, and
turns into an actual fact.

Let us apply this notion to the salvation of the world. What does it
pragmatically mean to say that this is possible? It means that some of
the conditions of the world's deliverance do actually exist. The more of
them there are existent, the fewer preventing conditions you can find,
the better-grounded is the salvation's possibility, the more PROBABLE
does the fact of the deliverance become.

So much for our preliminary look at possibility.

Now it would contradict the very spirit of life to say that our minds
must be indifferent and neutral in questions like that of the world's
salvation. Anyone who pretends to be neutral writes himself down here
as a fool and a sham. We all do wish to minimize the insecurity of the
universe; we are and ought to be unhappy when we regard it as exposed to
every enemy and open to every life-destroying draft. Nevertheless there
are unhappy men who think the salvation of the world impossible. Theirs
is the doctrine known as pessimism.

Optimism in turn would be the doctrine that thinks the world's salvation
inevitable.

Midway between the two there stands what may be called the doctrine of
meliorism, tho it has hitherto figured less as a doctrine than as an
attitude in human affairs. Optimism has always been the regnant DOCTRINE
in european philosophy. Pessimism was only recently introduced by
Schopenhauer and counts few systematic defenders as yet. Meliorism
treats salvation as neither inevitable nor impossible. It treats it as
a possibility, which becomes more and more of a probability the more
numerous the actual conditions of salvation become.

It is clear that pragmatism must incline towards meliorism. Some
conditions of the world's salvation are actually extant, and she cannot
possibly close her eyes to this fact: and should the residual conditions
come, salvation would become an accomplished reality. Naturally the
terms I use here are exceedingly summary. You may interpret the
word 'salvation' in any way you like, and make it as diffuse and
distributive, or as climacteric and integral a phenomenon as you please.

Take, for example, any one of us in this room with the ideals which
he cherishes, and is willing to live and work for. Every such ideal
realized will be one moment in the world's salvation. But these
particular ideals are not bare abstract possibilities. They are
grounded, they are LIVE possibilities, for we are their live champions
and pledges, and if the complementary conditions come and add
themselves, our ideals will become actual things. What now are the
complementary conditions? They are first such a mixture of things as
will in the fulness of time give us a chance, a gap that we can spring
into, and, finally, OUR ACT.