All human thinking gets discursified; we exchange ideas; we lend and
borrow verifications, get them from one another by means of social
intercourse. All truth thus gets verbally built out, stored up, and made
available for everyone. Hence, we must TALK consistently just as we must
THINK consistently: for both in talk and thought we deal with kinds.
Names are arbitrary, but once understood they must be kept to. We
mustn't now call Abel 'Cain' or Cain 'Abel.' If we do, we ungear
ourselves from the whole book of Genesis, and from all its connexions
with the universe of speech and fact down to the present time. We throw
ourselves out of whatever truth that entire system of speech and fact
may embody.

The overwhelming majority of our true ideas admit of no direct or
face-to-face verification-those of past history, for example, as of Cain
and Abel. The stream of time can be remounted only verbally, or verified
indirectly by the present prolongations or effects of what the past
harbored. Yet if they agree with these verbalities and effects, we can
know that our ideas of the past are true. AS TRUE AS PAST TIME ITSELF
WAS, so true was Julius Caesar, so true were antediluvian monsters,
all in their proper dates and settings. That past time itself was, is
guaranteed by its coherence with everything that's present. True as the
present is, the past was also.

Agreement thus turns out to be essentially an affair of leading--leading
that is useful because it is into quarters that contain objects that are
important. True ideas lead us into useful verbal and conceptual
quarters as well as directly up to useful sensible termini. They lead
to consistency, stability and flowing human intercourse. They lead away
from excentricity and isolation, from foiled and barren thinking. The
untrammeled flowing of the leading-process, its general freedom from
clash and contradiction, passes for its indirect verification; but all
roads lead to Rome, and in the end and eventually, all true processes
must lead to the face of directly verifying sensible experiences
SOMEWHERE, which somebody's ideas have copied.

Such is the large loose way in which the pragmatist interprets the word
agreement. He treats it altogether practically. He lets it cover any
process of conduction from a present idea to a future terminus, provided
only it run prosperously. It is only thus that 'scientific' ideas,
flying as they do beyond common sense, can be said to agree with their
realities. It is, as I have already said, as if reality were made of
ether, atoms or electrons, but we mustn't think so literally. The term
'energy' doesn't even pretend to stand for anything 'objective.' It is
only a way of measuring the surface of phenomena so as to string their
changes on a simple formula.