But what do the words verification and validation themselves
pragmatically mean? They again signify certain practical consequences of
the verified and validated idea. It is hard to find any one phrase
that characterizes these consequences better than the ordinary
agreement-formula--just such consequences being what we have in mind
whenever we say that our ideas 'agree' with reality. They lead us,
namely, through the acts and other ideas which they instigate, into or
up to, or towards, other parts of experience with which we feel all the
while-such feeling being among our potentialities--that the original
ideas remain in agreement. The connexions and transitions come to us
from point to point as being progressive, harmonious, satisfactory. This
function of agreeable leading is what we mean by an idea's verification.
Such an account is vague and it sounds at first quite trivial, but it
has results which it will take the rest of my hour to explain.

Let me begin by reminding you of the fact that the possession of true
thoughts means everywhere the possession of invaluable instruments
of action; and that our duty to gain truth, so far from being a
blank command from out of the blue, or a 'stunt' self-imposed by our
intellect, can account for itself by excellent practical reasons.

The importance to human life of having true beliefs about matters of
fact is a thing too notorious. We live in a world of realities that can
be infinitely useful or infinitely harmful. Ideas that tell us which
of them to expect count as the true ideas in all this primary sphere of
verification, and the pursuit of such ideas is a primary human duty. The
possession of truth, so far from being here an end in itself, is only a
preliminary means towards other vital satisfactions. If I am lost in
the woods and starved, and find what looks like a cow-path, it is of the
utmost importance that I should think of a human habitation at the end
of it, for if I do so and follow it, I save myself. The true thought
is useful here because the house which is its object is useful. The
practical value of true ideas is thus primarily derived from the
practical importance of their objects to us. Their objects are, indeed,
not important at all times. I may on another occasion have no use
for the house; and then my idea of it, however verifiable, will be
practically irrelevant, and had better remain latent. Yet since almost
any object may some day become temporarily important, the advantage of
having a general stock of extra truths, of ideas that shall be true of
merely possible situations, is obvious. We store such extra truths away
in our memories, and with the overflow we fill our books of reference.
Whenever such an extra truth becomes practically relevant to one of our
emergencies, it passes from cold-storage to do work in the world, and
our belief in it grows active. You can say of it then either that 'it
is useful because it is true' or that 'it is true because it is useful.'
Both these phrases mean exactly the same thing, namely that here is
an idea that gets fulfilled and can be verified. True is the name for
whatever idea starts the verification-process, useful is the name for
its completed function in experience. True ideas would never have been
singled out as such, would never have acquired a class-name, least of
all a name suggesting value, unless they had been useful from the outset
in this way.