But philosophy is prospective also, and, after finding what the world
has been and done and yielded, still asks the further question 'what
does the world PROMISE?' Give us a matter that promises SUCCESS, that is
bound by its laws to lead our world ever nearer to perfection, and any
rational man will worship that matter as readily as Mr. Spencer
worships his own so-called unknowable power. It not only has made for
righteousness up to date, but it will make for righteousness forever;
and that is all we need. Doing practically all that a God can do, it is
equivalent to God, its function is a God's function, and is exerted in
a world in which a God would now be superfluous; from such a world a God
could never lawfully be missed. 'Cosmic emotion' would here be the right
name for religion.

But is the matter by which Mr. Spencer's process of cosmic evolution is
carried on any such principle of never-ending perfection as this? Indeed
it is not, for the future end of every cosmically evolved thing or
system of things is foretold by science to be death and tragedy; and
Mr. Spencer, in confining himself to the aesthetic and ignoring the
practical side of the controversy, has really contributed nothing
serious to its relief. But apply now our principle of practical results,
and see what a vital significance the question of materialism or theism
immediately acquires.

Theism and materialism, so indifferent when taken retrospectively,
point, when we take them prospectively, to wholly different outlooks of
experience. For, according to the theory of mechanical evolution, the
laws of redistribution of matter and motion, tho they are certainly to
thank for all the good hours which our organisms have ever yielded
us and for all the ideals which our minds now frame, are yet fatally
certain to undo their work again, and to redissolve everything that they
have once evolved. You all know the picture of the last state of the
universe which evolutionary science foresees. I cannot state it better
than in Mr. Balfour's words: "The energies of our system will decay, the
glory of the sun will be dimmed, and the earth, tideless and inert,
will no longer tolerate the race which has for a moment disturbed its
solitude. Man will go down into the pit, and all his thoughts will
perish. The uneasy, consciousness which in this obscure corner has for
a brief space broken the contented silence of the universe, will be at
rest. Matter will know itself no longer. 'Imperishable monuments' and
'immortal deeds,' death itself, and love stronger than death, will be as
though they had never been. Nor will anything that is, be better or be
worse for all that the labour, genius, devotion, and suffering of man
have striven through countless generations to effect." [Footnote: The
Foundations of Belief, p. 30.]