7. AESTHETIC UNION among things also obtains, and is very analogous to
ideological union. Things tell a story. Their parts hang together so as
to work out a climax. They play into each other's hands expressively.
Retrospectively, we can see that altho no definite purpose presided
over a chain of events, yet the events fell into a dramatic form, with
a start, a middle, and a finish. In point of fact all stories end; and
here again the point of view of a many is that more natural one to take.
The world is full of partial stories that run parallel to one another,
beginning and ending at odd times. They mutually interlace and interfere
at points, but we cannot unify them completely in our minds. In
following your life-history, I must temporarily turn my attention from
my own. Even a biographer of twins would have to press them alternately
upon his reader's attention.

It follows that whoever says that the whole world tells one story utters
another of those monistic dogmas that a man believes at his risk. It is
easy to see the world's history pluralistically, as a rope of which each
fibre tells a separate tale; but to conceive of each cross-section of
the rope as an absolutely single fact, and to sum the whole longitudinal
series into one being living an undivided life, is harder. We have
indeed the analogy of embryology to help us. The microscopist makes a
hundred flat cross-sections of a given embryo, and mentally unites them
into one solid whole. But the great world's ingredients, so far as
they are beings, seem, like the rope's fibres, to be discontinuous
cross-wise, and to cohere only in the longitudinal direction. Followed
in that direction they are many. Even the embryologist, when he follows
the DEVELOPMENT of his object, has to treat the history of each single
organ in turn. ABSOLUTE aesthetic union is thus another barely abstract
ideal. The world appears as something more epic than dramatic.

So far, then, we see how the world is unified by its many systems,
kinds, purposes, and dramas. That there is more union in all these ways
than openly appears is certainly true. That there MAY be one sovereign
purpose, system, kind, and story, is a legitimate hypothesis. All I
say here is that it is rash to affirm this dogmatically without better
evidence than we possess at present.