I wish that I had saved the first couple of pages of a thesis which
a student handed me a year or two ago. They illustrated my point so
clearly that I am sorry I cannot read them to you now. This young man,
who was a graduate of some Western college, began by saying that he had
always taken for granted that when you entered a philosophic class-room
you had to open relations with a universe entirely distinct from the one
you left behind you in the street. The two were supposed, he said, to
have so little to do with each other, that you could not possibly occupy
your mind with them at the same time. The world of concrete personal
experiences to which the street belongs is multitudinous beyond
imagination, tangled, muddy, painful and perplexed. The world to which
your philosophy-professor introduces you is simple, clean and noble.
The contradictions of real life are absent from it. Its architecture is
classic. Principles of reason trace its outlines, logical necessities
cement its parts. Purity and dignity are what it most expresses. It is a
kind of marble temple shining on a hill.

In point of fact it is far less an account of this actual world than
a clear addition built upon it, a classic sanctuary in which the
rationalist fancy may take refuge from the intolerably confused and
gothic character which mere facts present. It is no EXPLANATION of our
concrete universe, it is another thing altogether, a substitute for it,
a remedy, a way of escape.

Its temperament, if I may use the word temperament here, is utterly
alien to the temperament of existence in the concrete. REFINEMENT is
what characterizes our intellectualist philosophies. They exquisitely
satisfy that craving for a refined object of contemplation which is so
powerful an appetite of the mind. But I ask you in all seriousness to
look abroad on this colossal universe of concrete facts, on their awful
bewilderments, their surprises and cruelties, on the wildness which
they show, and then to tell me whether 'refined' is the one inevitable
descriptive adjective that springs to your lips.

Refinement has its place in things, true enough. But a philosophy that
breathes out nothing but refinement will never satisfy the empiricist
temper of mind. It will seem rather a monument of artificiality. So we
find men of science preferring to turn their backs on metaphysics as on
something altogether cloistered and spectral, and practical men shaking
philosophy's dust off their feet and following the call of the wild.

Truly there is something a little ghastly in the satisfaction with which
a pure but unreal system will fill a rationalist mind. Leibnitz was
a rationalist mind, with infinitely more interest in facts than
most rationalist minds can show. Yet if you wish for superficiality
incarnate, you have only to read that charmingly written 'Theodicee' of
his, in which he sought to justify the ways of God to man, and to prove
that the world we live in is the best of possible worlds. Let me quote a
specimen of what I mean.

Among other obstacles to his optimistic philosophy, it falls to Leibnitz
to consider the number of the eternally damned. That it is infinitely
greater, in our human case, than that of those saved he assumes as a
premise from the theologians, and then proceeds to argue in this way.
Even then, he says: