The character of the absolute knower's picture is however so impossible
for us to represent clearly, that we may fairly suppose that the
authority which absolute monism undoubtedly possesses, and probably
always will possess over some persons, draws its strength far less from
intellectual than from mystical grounds. To interpret absolute monism
worthily, be a mystic. Mystical states of mind in every degree are shown
by history, usually tho not always, to make for the monistic view. This
is no proper occasion to enter upon the general subject of mysticism,
but I will quote one mystical pronouncement to show just what I mean.
The paragon of all monistic systems is the Vedanta philosophy of
Hindostan, and the paragon of Vedantist missionaries was the late
Swami Vivekananda who visited our shores some years ago. The method of
Vedantism is the mystical method. You do not reason, but after going
through a certain discipline YOU SEE, and having seen, you can report
the truth. Vivekananda thus reports the truth in one of his lectures
here:

"Where is any more misery for him who sees this Oneness in the
Universe...this Oneness of life, Oneness of everything? ...This
separation between man and man, man and woman, man and child, nation
from nation, earth from moon, moon from sun, this separation between
atom and atom is the cause really of all the misery, and the Vedanta
says this separation does not exist, it is not real. It is merely
apparent, on the surface. In the heart of things there is Unity still.
If you go inside you find that Unity between man and man, women and
children, races and races, high and low, rich and poor, the gods and
men: all are One, and animals too, if you go deep enough, and he who has
attained to that has no more delusion. ... Where is any more delusion
for him? What can delude him? He knows the reality of everything, the
secret of everything. Where is there any more misery for him? What does
he desire? He has traced the reality of everything unto the Lord, that
centre, that Unity of everything, and that is Eternal Bliss, Eternal
Knowledge, Eternal Existence. Neither death nor disease, nor sorrow nor
misery, nor discontent is there ... in the centre, the reality, there
is no one to be mourned for, no one to be sorry for. He has penetrated
everything, the Pure One, the Formless, the Bodiless, the Stainless, He
the Knower, He the Great Poet, the Self-Existent, He who is giving to
everyone what he deserves."

Observe how radical the character of the monism here is. Separation is
not simply overcome by the One, it is denied to exist. There is no many.
We are not parts of the One; It has no parts; and since in a sense we
undeniably ARE, it must be that each of us is the One, indivisibly and
totally. AN ABSOLUTE ONE, AND I THAT ONE--surely we have here a religion
which, emotionally considered, has a high pragmatic value; it imparts a
perfect sumptuosity of security. As our Swami says in another place: