The Prisoner, in his own Defence, says, when he had the Misfortune of
falling into the Pyrates Hands, he was chief Mate of the _Samuel_, of
_London_, Captain _Cary_; and when he had hid himself, to prevent the
Design of carrying him away, they found him, and beat and threw him
over-board. Seven Days afterwards, upon his objecting against, and refusing
to sign their Articles, he was cut and abus'd again: That tho' after this
he ingratiated himself, by a more humble Carriage, it was only to make Life
easy; the Shares they had given him, having been from Time to Time returned
again to such Prisoners as fell in his Way; till of late, indeed, he had
made a small Reservation, and had desired Captain _Loan_ to take two or
three Moidores from him, to carry to his Wife. He was once taken, he says,
at making his Escape, in the _West-Indies_, and, with two more, sentenced
to be shot for it, by a drunken Jury; the latter actually suffered, and he
was preserved only by one of the chief Pyrates taking a sudden Liking to
him, and bullying the others. A second time he ran away at _Hispaniola_,
carrying a Pocket Compass, for conducting him through the Woods; but that
being a most desolate and wild Part of the Island he fell upon, and he
ignorant how to direct his Course, was obliged, after two or three Days
wandering, to return towards the Ship again, denying with egregious Oaths,
the Design he was charg'd with, for Fear they should shoot him. From this
Time he hopes it will be some Extenuation of his Fault, that most of the
acquitted Prisoners can witness, they entertained Jealousies of him, and
_Roberts_ would not admit him into his Secrets; and withal, that Captain
_Cary_, (and four other Passengers with him) had made Affidavit of his
having been forced from his Employ, which tho' he could not produce, yet he
humbly hoped the Court would think highly probable from the Circumstances
offered.

On the whole, the Court was of Opinion Artists had the best Pretension to
the Plea of Force, from the Necessity Pyrates are sometimes under of
engaging such, and that many Parts of his own Defence had been confirmed by
the Evidence, who had asserted he acted with Reluctance, and had expressed
a Concern and Trouble for the little Hopes remained to him, of extricating
himself. That he had used all Prisoners (as they were called) well, at the
hazard of ill Usage to himself. That he had not in any military Capacity
assisted their Robberies. That he had twice endeavoured his Escape, with
the utmost Danger. _Acquitted him._

Captain _James Skyrm._

IT appeared from the Evidence of several Prisoners acquitted, that
this _Skyrm_ commanded the _Ranger_, in that Defence she made against the
King's Ship; that he ordered the Men to their Quarters, and the Guns to be
loaded and fired, having a Sword in his Hand, to enforce those Commands;
and beat such to their Duty whom he espied any way negligent or backward.
That altho' he had lost a Leg in the Action, his Temper was so warm, as to
refuse going off the Deck, till he found all was lost.