_Worley_ had by this Time encreased his Company to about five and twenty
Men, had six Guns mounted, and small Arms as many as were necessary for
them, and seem'd to be in a good thriving sort of a Way. He made a black
Ensign, with a white Death's Head in the Middle of it, and other Colours
suitable to it. They all signed Articles, and bound themselves under a
solemn Oath, to take no Quarters, but to stand by one another to the last
Man, which was rashly fulfill'd a little afterwards.

For going into an Inlet in _North-Carolina_, to clean, the Governor
received Information of it, and fitted out two Sloops, one of eight Guns,
and the other with six, and about seventy Men between them. _Worley_ had
clean'd his Sloop, and sail'd before the _Carolina_ Sloops reached the
Place, and steered to the Northward; but the Sloops just mentioned,
pursuing the same Course, came in sight of _Worley_, as he was cruising off
the Capes of _Virginia_, and being in the Offin, he stood in as soon as he
saw the Sloops, intending thereby to have cut them off from _James_ River;
for he verily believed they had been bound thither, not imagining, in the
least, they were in Pursuit of him.

The two Sloops standing towards the Capes at the same Time, and _Worley_
hoisting of his black Flag, the Inhabitants of _James_ Town were in the
utmost Consternation, thinking that all three had been Pyrates, and that
their Design had been upon them; so that all the Ships and Vessels that
were in the Road, or in the Rivers up the Bay, had Orders immediately to
hale in to the Shore, for their Security, or else to prepare for their
Defence, if they thought themselves in a Condition to fight. Soon after two
Boats, which were sent out to get Intelligence, came crowding in, and
brought an Account, that one of the Pyrates was in the Bay, being a small
Sloop of six Guns. The Governor expecting the rest would have followed, and
altogether make some Attempt to land, for the sake of Plunder, beat to
Arms, and collected all the Force that could be got together, to oppose
them; he ordered all the Guns out of the Ships, to make a Platform, and, in
short, put the whole Colony in a warlike Posture; but was very much
surprised at last, to see all the supposed Pyrates fighting with one
another.

The Truth of the Matter is, _Worley_ gained the Bay, thinking to make sure
of his two Prizes, by keeping them from coming in; but by the hoisting of
the King's Colours, and firing a Gun, he quickly was sensible of his
Mistake, and too soon perceived that the Tables were turned upon him; that
instead of keeping them out, he found himself, by a superiour Force kept
in. When the Pyrates saw how Things went, they resolutely prepar'd
themselves for a desperate Defence; and tho' three to one odds, _Worley_
and his Crew determined to fight to the last Gasp, and receive no Quarters,
agreeably to what they had before sworn; so that they must either Dye or
Conquer upon the Spot.