On their Side it is prohibited under Pain of Death, a Law less effectual to
the Prevention of it than pecuniary Mulcts would be, because a Penalty so
inadequate and disproportioned, is only _In terrorem_, and makes it
merciful in the Governor, or his Instruments, to take a Composition of
eight or ten Moidors, when any Subject is catched, and is the common Custom
so to do as often as they are found out.

On our Side it is Confiscation of what they can get, which considering,
they have no Men of War to guard the Coast, need be very little, without
supine Neglect and Carelessness.

I am a Man of War, or Privateer, and being in Want of Provisions, or in
Search of Pyrates, put in to _Pernambuca_ for Intelligence, to enable me
for the Pursuit: The Dread of Pyrates keeps every one off, till you have
first sent an Officer, with the proper Compliments to the Governor, who
immediately gives Leave for your buying every Necessary you are in want of,
provided it be with Money, and not an Exchange of Merchandize, which is
against the Laws of the Country.

On this first time of going on Shore, depends the success of the whole
Affair, and requires a cautious and discreet Management in the Person
entrusted: He will be immediately surrounded at landing with the great and
the small Rabble, to enquire who? and whence he comes? and whether bound?
_&c._ and the Men are taught to answer, from _Guiney_, denying any thing of
a Slave on Board, which are under Hatches, and make no Shew; nor need they,
for those who have Money to lay out will conclude on that themselves.

By that time the Compliment is paid to the Governor, the News has spread
all round the Town, and some Merchant addresses you, as a Stranger, to the
Civility of his House, but privately desires to know what Negroes he can
have, and what Price. A Governor may possibly use an Instrument in sifting
this, but the Appearance of the Gentleman, and the Circumstance of being so
soon engaged after leaving the other, will go a great way in forming a
Man's Judgment, and leaves him no room for the Suspicion of such a Snare;
however, to have a due Guard, Intimations will suffice, and bring him, and
Friends enough to carry off the best Part of a Cargo in two Nights time,
from 20 to 30 Moidors a Boy, and from 30 to 40 a Man Slave. The Hazard is
less at _Rio Janeiro_.

There has been another Method attempted, of settling a Correspondence with
some _Portugueze_ Merchant or two, who, as they may be certain within a
Fortnight of any Vessels arriving on their Coast with Slaves, might settle
Signals for the debarquing them at an unfrequented Part of the Coast, but
whether any Exceptions were made to the Price, or that the _Portuguese_
dread Discovery, and the severest Prosecution on so notorious a Breach of
the Law, I cannot tell but it has hither to proved abortive.

However, Stratagems laudable, and attended with Profit, at no other Hazard
(as I can perceive) then loss of Time, are worth attempting; it is what is
every Day practised with the _Spaniards_ from _Jamaica_.

* * *