The Pavements also of the Town are in some Places of broad Tiles, the
remaining Fragments of their Conquest. The Town has the outer Branch of the
River behind it, and the Harbour before it, jetting into which latter are
close Keys for the weighing and receiving of Customage on Merchandize, and
for the meeting and conferring of Merchants and Traders. The Houses are
strong built, but homely, letticed like those of _Lisbon_, for the
Admission of Air, without Closets, and what is worse, Hearths; which makes
their Cookery consist all in frying and stewing upon Stoves; and that they
do till the Flesh become tender enough to shake it to Pieces, and one Knife
is then thought sufficient to serve a Table of half a Score.

The greatest Inconvenience of _Pernambuca_ is, that there is not one
Publick-House in it; so that Strangers are obliged to hire any ordinary one
they can get, at a Guinea a Month: And others who come to transact Affairs
of Importance, must come recommended, if it were only for the sake of
Privacy.

The Market is stocked well enough, Beef being at five Farthings _per l_. a
Sheep or Goat at nine Shillings, a Turkey four Shillings, and Fowls two
Shillings, the largest I ever saw, and may be procured much Cheaper, by
hiring a Man to fetch them out of the Country. The dearest in its kind is
Water, which being fetch'd in Vessels from _Olinda_, will not be put on
Board in the Road under two Crusado's a Pipe.

The _Portuguese_ here are darker than those of _Europe_, not only from a
warmer Climate, but their many Intermarriages with the Negroes, who are
numerous there, and some of them of good Credit and Circumstances. The
Women (not unlike the Mulatto Generation every where else) are fond of
Strangers; not only the Courtezans, whose Interest may be supposed to wind
up their Affections, but also the marryed Women who think themselves
obliged, when you favour them with the Secrecy of an Appointment; but the
Unhappiness of pursuing Amours, is, that the generallity of both Sexes are
touched with veneral Taints, without so much as one Surgeon among them, or
any Body skilled in Physick, to cure or palliate the progressive Mischief:
The only Person pretending that Way, is an _Irish_ Father, whose Knowledge
is all comprehended in the Virtues of two or three Simples, and those, with
the Salubrity of the Air and Temperance, is what they depend on, for
subduing the worst of Malignity; and it may not be unworthy Notice, that
tho' few are exempted from the Misfortune of a Running, Eruptions, or the
like, yet I could hear of none precipitated into those deplorable
Circumstances we see common in unskillful mercurial Processes.

There are three Monasteries, and about six Churches, none of them Rich or
Magnificent, unless one dedicated to St. _Antonio_, the Patron of their
Kingdom, which shines all over with exquisite Pieces of Paint and Gold.

The Export of _Brasil_ (besides Gold) is chiefly Sugars and Tobacco; the
latter are sent off in Rowls of a Quintal Weight, kept continually
moistened with Mulossus, which, with the Soil it springs from, imparts a
strong and peculiar Scent, more sensible in the Snuff made from it, which
tho' under Prohibition of importing to _Lisbon_, sells here at 2 _s. per
l_. as the Tobacco does at about 6 Millraies a Rowl. The finest of their
Sugars sells at 8 _s. per_ Roove, and a small ill tasted Rum drawn from the
Dregs and Mulossus, at two Testunes a Gallon.