Having been so many Years upon this Island, it may be imagined, their
Cloaths had long been worn out, so that their Majesties were extreamly out
at the Elbows; I cannot say they were ragged, since they had no Cloaths,
they had nothing to cover them but the Skins of Beasts without any tanning,
but with all the Hair on, nor a Shoe nor Stocking, so they looked like the
Pictures of _Hercules_ in the Lion's Skin; and being overgrown with Beard,
and Hair upon their Bodies, they appeared the most savage Figures that a
Man's Imagination can frame.

However, they soon got rigg'd, for they sold great Numbers of those poor
People under them, for Cloaths, Knives, Saws, Powder and Ball, and many
other Things, and became so familiar that they went aboard the _Delicia_,
and were observed to be very curious, examining the inside of the Ship, and
very familiar with the Men, inviting them ashore. Their Design in doing
this, as they afterwards confessed, was to try if it was not practicable to
surprize the Ship in the Night, which they judged very easy, in case there
was but a slender Watch kept on Board, they having Boats and Men enough at
Command, but it seems the Captain was aware of them, and kept so strong a
Watch upon Deck, that they found it was in vain to make any Attempt;
wherefore, when some of the Men went ashore, they were for inveigling them,
and drawing them into a Plot, for seizing the Captain and securing the rest
of the Men under Hatches, when they should have the Night-Watch, promising
a Signal to come on Board to join them; proposing, if they succeeded, to go
a Pyrating together, not doubting but with that Ship they should be able to
take any Thing they met on the Sea: But the Captain observing an intimacy
growing betwixt them and some of his Men, thought it could be for no good,
he therefore broke it off in Time, not suffering them so much as to talk
together; and when he sent a Boat on Shore with an Officer to treat with
them about the Sale of Slaves, the Crew remained on Board the Boat, and no
Man was suffered to talk with them, but the Person deputed by him for that
Purpose.

Before he sailed away, and they found that nothing was to be done, they
confessed all the Designs they had formed against him. Thus he left them as
he found them, in a great deal of dirty State and Royalty, but with fewer
Subjects than they had, having, as we observed, sold many of them; and if
Ambition be the darling Passion of Men, no doubt they were happy. One of
these great Princes had formerly been a Waterman upon the _Thames_, where
having committed a Murder, he fled to the _West-Indies_, and was of the
Number of those who run away with the Sloops; the rest had been all
foremast Men, nor was there a Man amongst them, who could either read or
write, and yet their Secretaries of State had no more Learning than
themselves. This is all the Account we can give of these Kings of
_Madagascar_, some of whom it is probable are reigning to this Day.

CHAP. II. OF Captain _MARTEL_, And his CREW.