E_Very Man has a Vote in Affairs of Moment; has equal Title to the
fresh Provisions, or strong Liquors, at any Time seized, and use them at
pleasure, unless a Scarcity_ (no uncommon Thing among them) _make it
necessary, for the good of all, to vote a Retrenchment_.

II.

_Every Man to be called fairly in turn, by List, on Board of Prizes,
because, (over and above their proper Share_,) _they were on these
Occasions allowed a Shift of Cloaths: But if they defrauded the Company to
the Value of a Dollar, in Plate, Jewels, or Money_, MAROONING _was their
Punishment_. This was a Barbarous Custom of putting the Offender on Shore,
on some desolate or uninhabited Cape or Island, with a Gun, a few Shot, a
Bottle of Water, and a Bottle of Powder, to subsist with, or starve. _If
the Robbery was only between one another, they contented themselves with
slitting the Ears and Nose of him that was Guilty, and set him on Shore,
not in an uninhabited Place, but somewhere, where he was sure to encounter
Hardships_.

III.

_No Person to Game at Cards or Dice for Money_.

IV.

_The Lights and Candles to be put out at eight o'Clock at Night: If any of
the Crew, after that Hour, still remained inclined for Drinking, they were
to do it on the open Deck_; which _Roberts_ believed would give a Check to
their Debauches, for he was a sober Man himself, but found at length, that
all his Endeavours to put an End to this Debauch, proved ineffectual.

V.

_To keep their Piece, Pistols, and Cutlash clean, and fit for Service_: In
this they were extravagantly nice, endeavouring to outdo one another, in
the Beauty and Richness of their Arms, giving sometimes at an Auction (at
the Mast,) 30 or 40 _l._ a Pair, for Pistols. These were slung in Time of
Service, with different coloured Ribbands, over their Shoulders, in a Way
peculiar to these Fellows, in which they took great Delight.

VI.

_No Boy or Woman to be allowed amongst them. If any Man were sound seducing
anny of the latter Sex, and carried her to Sea, disguised, he was to suffer
Death_; so that when any fell into their Hands, as it chanced in the
_Onslow_, they put a Centinel immediately over her to prevent ill
Consequences from so dangerous an Instrument of Division and Quarrel; but
then here lies the Roguery; they contend who shall be Centinel, which
happens generally to one of the greatest Bullies, who, to secure the Lady's
Virtue, will let none lye with her but himself.

VII.

_To Desert the Ship, or their Quarters in Battle, was punished with Death,
or Marooning._

VIII.

_No striking one another on Board, but every Man's Quarrels to be ended on
Shore, at Sword and Pistol, Thus_; The Quarter-Master of the Ship, when the
Parties will not come to any Reconciliation, accompanies them on Shore with
what Assistance he thinks proper, and turns the Disputants Back to Back, at
so many Paces Distance: At the Word of Command, they turn and fire
immediately, (or else the Piece is knocked out of their Hands:) If both
miss, they come to their Cutlashes, and then he is declared Victor who
draws the first Blood.

IX.