About half an Hour after Ten, in the Morning, the Pyrate Ship came within
Gun-shot, and fired four Chace Guns, hoisted a black Flag at the
Mizen-Peek, and got their Sprit-sail Yard under their Bowsprit, for
boarding. In half an Hour more, approaching still nigher, they Starboarded
their Helm, and gave her a Broadside, the Pyrate bringing to, and returning
the same.

After this, the Deponents say, their Fire grew slack for some Time, because
the Pyrate was shot so far a Head on the Weather-Bow, that few of their
Guns could Point to her; yet in this Interval their black Flag was either
Shot away, or hawled down a little Space, and hoisted again.

At length, by their ill Steerage, and Favour of the Wind, they came near, a
second Time; and about Two in the Afternoon shot away their Main-topmast.

The Colours they fought under, besides a black Flag, were a red _English_
Ensign, a King's Jack, and a _Dutch_ Pendant, which they struck at, or
about, Three in the Afternoon, and called for Quarters; it proving to be a
_French_ built Ship of 32 Guns, called the _Ranger._

_Isaac Sun_, _Ralph Baldrick_, _Daniel Maclauglin._

When the Evidence had been heard, the Prisoners were called upon to answer,
how they came on Board this Pyrate Ship; and their Reason for so audacious
a Resistance, as had been made against the King's Ship.

To this, each, in his Reply, owned himself to be one of those taken out of
the _Ranger_; that he had signed their pyratical Articles, and shared in
their Plunder, some few only accepted, who had been there too short a Time.
But that neither in this signing, or sharing, nor in the Resistance had
been made against his Majesty's Ship, had they been Voluntiers, but had
acted in these several Parts, from a Terror of Death; which a Law amongst
them, was to be the Portion of those who refused. The Court then ask'd, who
made those Laws? How those Guns came to be fired? Or why they had not
deserted their Stations, and mutinied, when so fair a Prospect of
Redemption offered? They replied still, with the same Answers, and could
extenuate their Crimes, with no other Plea, than being forced Men.
Wherefore the Court were of Opinion, that the Indictment, as it charged
them with an unlawful Attack and Resistance of the King's Ship, was
sufficiently proved; but then it being undeniably evident, that many of
these Prisoners had been forced, and some of them of very short standing,
they did, on mature Deliberation, come to this merciful Resolution;

That they would hear further Evidence for, or against, each Person singly,
in Relation to those Parts of the Indictment, which declared them
Voluntiers, or charged them with aiding and assisting, at the burning,
sinking, or robbing of other Ships; for if they acted, or assisted, in any
Robberies or Devastations, it would be a Conviction they were Voluntiers;
here such Evidence, though it might want the Form, still carried the Reason
of the Law with it.

The Charge was exhibited also against the following Pyrates taken
out of the _Royal Fortune._