The Harbour of _Princes_ is at the E. S. E. Point of the Island; the
North-Side has gradual Soundings, but here deep Water, having no Ground at
a Mile off with 140 Fathom of Line. The Port (when in) is a smooth narrow
Bay, safe from Winds, (unless a little Swell when Southerly) and draughted
into other smaller and sandy Ones, convenient for raising of Tents,
Watering, and hawling the Seam; the whole protected by a Fort, or rather
Battery, of a dozen Guns on the Larboard-Side. At the Head of the Bay
stands the Town, about a Mile from the anchoring Place, and consists of two
or three regular Streets, of wooden built Houses, where the Governor and
chief Men of the Island reside. Here the Water grows shallow for a
considerable Distance, and the Natives, at every Ebb, (having before
encompassed every convenient Angle with a Rise of Stones, something like
Weirs in _England_) resort for catching of Fish, which, with them, is a
daily Diversion, as well as Subsistance, 500 attending with Sticks and
wicker Baskets; and if they cannot dip them with one Hand, they knock them
down with the other. The Tides rise regularly 6 Foot in the Harbour, and
yet not half that Heighth without the Capes that make the Bay.

Here are constantly two Missionaries, who are sent for six Years to
inculcate the Christian Principles, and more especially attend the
Conversion of the Negroes; the present are _Venetians_, ingenious Men, who
seem to despise the loose Morals and Behaviour of the Seculars, and
complain of them as of the Slaves, _ut Color Mores sunt nigri_. They have a
neat Conventual-House and a Garden appropriated, which, by their own
Industry and Labour, not only thrives with the several Natives of the Soil,
but many Exoticks and Curiosities. A Fruit in particular, larger than a
Chesnut, yellow, containing two Stones, with a Pulp, or clammy Substance
about them, which, when suck'd, exceeds in Sweetness, Sugar or Honey, and
has this Property beyond them, of giving a sweet Taste to every Liquid you
swallow for the whole Evening after. The only Plague infesting the Garden,
is a Vermin called Land-Crabs, in vast Numbers, of a bright red Colour, (in
other Respects like the Sea ones) which burrough in these sandy Soils like
Rabbets, and are as shy.

The Island is a pleasant Intermixture of Hill and Valley; the Hills spread
with Palms, Coco-Nuts, and Cotton-Trees, with Numbers of Monkeys and
Parrots among them; the Valleys with fruitful Plantations of _Yamms,
Kulalu, Papas_, Variety of Sallating, _Ananas_, or Pine-Apples, _Guavas,
Plantanes, Bonanas, Manyocos_, and _Indian_ Corn; with Fowls, _Guinea_
Hens, _Muscovy_ Ducks, Goats, Hogs, Turkies, and wild Beefs, with each a
little Village of Negroes, who, under the Direction of their several
Masters, manage the Cultivation, and exchange or sell them for Money, much
after the same Rates with the People of St. _Thome_.

I shall run a Description of the Vegetables, with their Properties, not
only because they are the Produce of this Island, but most of them of
_Africa_ in general.