The Court and Criminals being both appointed, as also Council to plead, the
Judge got up in a Tree, and had a dirty Taurpaulin hung over his Shoulders;
this was done by Way of Robe, with a Thrum Cap on his Head, and a large
Pair of Spectacles upon his Nose: Thus equipp'd, he settled himself in his
Place, and abundance of Officers attending him below, with Crows,
Handspikes, _&c._ instead of Wands, Tipstaves, and such like.-- The
Criminals were brought out, making a thousand sour Faces; and one who acted
as Attorney-General opened the Charge against them; their Speeches were
very laconick, and their whole Proceedings concise. We shall give it by Way
of Dialogue.

_Attorn. Gen._ An't please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
here is a Fellow before you that is a sad Dog, a sad sad Dog; and I humbly
hope your Lordship will order him to be hang'd out of the Way
immediately.--He has committed Pyracy upon the High Seas, and we shall
prove, an't please your Lordship, that this Fellow, this sad Dog before
you, has escap'd a thousand Storms, nay, has got safe ashore when the Ship
has been cast away, which was a certain Sign he was not born to be drown'd;
yet not having the Fear of hanging before his Eyes, he went on robbing and
ravishing Man, Woman and Child, plundering Ships Cargoes fore and aft,
burning and sinking Ship, Bark and Boat, as if the Devil had been in him.
But this is not all, my Lord, he has committed worse Villanies than all
these, for we shall prove, that he has been guilty of drinking Small-Beer;
and your Lordship knows, there never was a sober Fellow but what was a
Rogue.--My Lord, I should have spoke much finer than I do now, but that, as
your Lordship knows our Rum is all out, and how should a Man speak good Law
that has not drank a Dram.--However, I hope, your Lordship will order the
Fellow to be hang'd.

_Judge._--Hearkee me, Sirrah,--you lousy, pittiful, ill-look'd Dog; what
have you to say why you should not be tuck'd up immediately, and set a
Sun-drying like a Scare-crow?--Are you guilty, or not guilty?

_Pris._ Not guilty, an't please your Worship.

_Judge._ Not guilty! say so again, Sirrah, and I'll have you hang'd without
any Tryal.

_Pris._ An't please your Worship's Honour, my Lord, I am as honest a poor
Fellow as ever went between Stem and Stern of a Ship, and can hand, reef,
steer, and clap two Ends of a Rope together, as well as e'er a He that ever
cross'd salt Water; but I was taken by one _George Bradley_ [the Name of
him that sat as Judge,] a notorious Pyrate, a sad Rogue as ever was
unhang'd, and he forc'd me, an't please your Honour.

_Judge._ Answer me, Sirrah,--How will you be try'd?

_Pris._ By G-- and my Country.

_Judge._ The Devil you will.--Why then, Gentlemen of the Jury, I think we
have nothing to do but to proceed to Judgment.

_Attor. Gen._ Right, my Lord; for if the Fellow should be suffer'd to
speak, he may clear himself, and that's an Affront to the Court.

_Pris._ Pray, my Lord, I hope your Lordship will consider--

_Judge._ Consider!--How dare you talk of considering? --Sirrah, Sirrah, I
never consider'd in all my Life. --I'll make it Treason to consider.

_Pris._ But, I hope, your Lordship will hear some Reason.