A Combination and Conspiracy was formed, betwixt _Moody, Ashplant, Magnes,
Mare_, and others, to rise, and kill the Officers, and run away with the
Ship. This they had carried on by Means of a Mulatto Boy, who was allow'd
to attend them, and proved very trusty in his Messages, between the
Principals; but the Evening of that Night they were to have made this
Struggle, two of the Prisoners that sat next to _Ashplant_, heard the Boy
whisper them upon the Project, and naming to him the Hour they should be
ready, presently gave Notice of it to the Captain, which put the Ship in an
Alarm, for a little Time; and, on Examination, several of them had made
shift to break off, or lose, their Shackles, (no doubt for such Purpose;)
but it tended only to procure to themselves worse Usage and Confinement.

In the same Passage to Cape _Corso_, the Prize, _Royal Fortune_, was in the
same Danger. She was left at the Island of St. _Thomas_'s, in the
Possession of an Officer, and a few Men, to take in some fresh Provisions,
(which were scarce at Cape _Corso_) with Orders to follow the Ship. There
were only some of the Pyrates Negroes, three or four wounded Prisoners, and
_Scudamore_, their Surgeon; from whom they seemed to be under no
Apprehension, especially from the last, who might have hoped for Favour, on
Account of his Employ; and had stood so much indebted for his Liberty,
eating and drinking constantly with the Officer; yet this Fellow,
regardless of the Favour, and lost to all Sense of Reformation, endeavoured
to bring over the Negroes to his Design of murdering the People, and
running away with the Ship. He easily prevailed with the Negroes to come
into the Design; but when he came to communicate it to his Fellow
Prisoners, and would have drawn them into the same Measures, by telling
them, he understood Navigation, that the Negroes were stout Fellows, and by
a Smattering he had in the _Angolan_ Language, he had found willing to
undertake such an Enterprize; and that it was better venturing to do this,
run down the Coast, and raise a new Company, than to proceed to Cape
_Corso_, and be hanged like a Dog, and Sun dry'd. One of them abhorring the
Cruelty, or fearing the Success, discovered it to the Officer, who made him
immediately a Prisoner, and brought the Ship safe.

When they came to be lodg'd in Cape _Corso-Castle_, their Hopes of this
kind all cut off, and that they were assured they must there soon receive a
final Sentence; the Note was changed among most of them, and from vain
insolent jesting, they became serious and devout, begging for good Books,
and joyning in publick Prayers, and singing of Psalms, twice at least every
Day.

As to their Tryals, if we should give them at length, it may appear tedious
to the Reader, for which Reason, I have, for the avoiding Tautology and
Repetition, put as many of them together as were try'd for the same Fact,
reserving the Circumstances which are most material, with Observations on
the dying Behaviour of such of them, as came to my Knowledge.