They had not been long at Anchor again, before they had several Canoes on
Board with both black and white Inhabitants, who continued, without
Interruption, all good Offices, during their Stay; particularly _John
Trumpet_ brought a large Boat of Arrack, than which, nothing could be more
pleasing (about 90 Legers,) as also 60 Bales of Sugar; an Offering, its
presumed, from the Governor and his Daughter, who, in Return, had a fine
Table-Clock sent him, (the Plunder of Captain _Mackra_'s Ship,) and she a
large Gold Watch, Earnests of the Pay they designed to make.

When they had all on Board, they paid Mr. _Trumpet_ to his Satisfaction, it
was computed, 6 or 7000 _l._ gave him three Cheers, 11 Guns each Ship, and
throw'd Ducatoons into his Boat by handfuls, for the Boat-Men to scramble
for.

That Night being little Wind, did not weigh, and _Trumpet_, in the Morning,
waked them to the Sight of more Arrack, Chests of Piece-Goods, and ready
made Clothes, bringing the Fiscal of the Place also with him. At Noon,
while those were on Board, saw a Sail to the Southward, which they weighed,
and chaced after; but she having a good Offing, got to the Northward of
them, and anchored a small Distance from _Cochin_ Fort; the aforementioned
Gentlemen assuring them, that they would not be molested in taking her from
under the Castle, sollicited before hand for the buying her, and advised
them to stand in, which they did boldly, to board her; but when they came
within a Cable's length or two of the Chace, now near Shore, the Fort fired
two small Guns, whose Shot falling nigh their Muzzels, they instantly bore
out of the Road, made an easy Sail to the Southward, and anchored at Night
in their former Birth, where _John Trumpet_, to engage their Stay a little
longer, informed them, that in a few Days a very rich Ship was to pass by,
commanded by the General of _Bombay_'s Brother.

This Governor is an Emblem of foreign Power. What Inconvenience and Injury
must the Master's Subjects sustain under one who can truckle to such
treacherous and base Means, as corresponding and trading with Pyrates to
enrich himself? Certainly such a Man will stickle at no Injustice to repair
or make a Fortune. He has the _Argumentum bacillum_ always in his own
Hands, and can convince, when he pleases, in half the Time of other
Arguments, that Fraud and Oppression is Law. That he imploys Instruments in
such dirty Work, expresses the Guilt and Shame, but no way mitigates the
Crime. _John Trumpet_ was the Tool; but, as the Dog said in the Fable, on
another Occasion, _What is done by the Master's Orders, is the Master's
Actions_.

I cannot but reflect, on this Occasion, what a vile Government _Sancho
Pancho_ had of it; he had not only such _Perquisites_ rescinded, but was
really almost starved; the Victuals taken from him almost every Day, and
only under a Pretence of preserving his Excellency's Health: But
Governments differ.