PRAGMATISM

Lecture I

The Present Dilemma in Philosophy

In the preface to that admirable collection of essays of his called
'Heretics,' Mr. Chesterton writes these words: "There are some
people--and I am one of them--who think that the most practical and
important thing about a man is still his view of the universe. We think
that for a landlady considering a lodger, it is important to know his
income, but still more important to know his philosophy. We think that
for a general about to fight an enemy, it is important to know
the enemy's numbers, but still more important to know the enemy's
philosophy. We think the question is not whether the theory of the
cosmos affects matters, but whether, in the long run, anything else
affects them."

I think with Mr. Chesterton in this matter. I know that you, ladies and
gentlemen, have a philosophy, each and all of you, and that the most
interesting and important thing about you is the way in which it
determines the perspective in your several worlds. You know the same
of me. And yet I confess to a certain tremor at the audacity of the
enterprise which I am about to begin. For the philosophy which is so
important in each of us is not a technical matter; it is our more or
less dumb sense of what life honestly and deeply means. It is only
partly got from books; it is our individual way of just seeing and
feeling the total push and pressure of the cosmos. I have no right to
assume that many of you are students of the cosmos in the class-room
sense, yet here I stand desirous of interesting you in a philosophy
which to no small extent has to be technically treated. I wish to fill
you with sympathy with a contemporaneous tendency in which I profoundly
believe, and yet I have to talk like a professor to you who are not
students. Whatever universe a professor believes in must at any rate be
a universe that lends itself to lengthy discourse. A universe definable
in two sentences is something for which the professorial intellect has
no use. No faith in anything of that cheap kind! I have heard friends
and colleagues try to popularize philosophy in this very hall, but they
soon grew dry, and then technical, and the results were only partially
encouraging. So my enterprise is a bold one. The founder of pragmatism
himself recently gave a course of lectures at the Lowell Institute with
that very word in its title-flashes of brilliant light relieved
against Cimmerian darkness! None of us, I fancy, understood ALL that he
said--yet here I stand, making a very similar venture.

I risk it because the very lectures I speak of DREW--they brought good
audiences. There is, it must be confessed, a curious fascination in
hearing deep things talked about, even tho neither we nor the disputants
understand them. We get the problematic thrill, we feel the presence of
the vastness. Let a controversy begin in a smoking-room anywhere, about
free-will or God's omniscience, or good and evil, and see how everyone
in the place pricks up his ears. Philosophy's results concern us all
most vitally, and philosophy's queerest arguments tickle agreeably our
sense of subtlety and ingenuity.

Believing in philosophy myself devoutly, and believing also that a kind
of new dawn is breaking upon us philosophers, I feel impelled, per fas
aut nefas, to try to impart to you some news of the situation.