When the man of affairs, the artist, or the man of science fails, he is
not rebutted.  He tries again.  He says the impressions of sense _must_
give way, _must_ be reduced to the desiderated form.[3]  They all
postulate in the interests of their volitional nature a harmony between
the latter and the nature of things.  The theologian does no more.  And
the reflex doctrine of the mind's structure, though all theology should
as yet have failed of its endeavor, could but confess that the endeavor
itself at least obeyed in form the mind's most necessary law.[4]

Now for the question I asked above: What kind of a being would God be
if he did exist?  The word 'God' has come to mean many things in the
history {121} of human thought, from Venus and Jupiter to the 'Idee'
which figures in the pages of Hegel.  Even the laws of physical nature
have, in these positivistic times, been held worthy of divine honor and
presented as the only fitting object of our reverence.[5]  Of course,
if our discussion is to bear any fruit, we must mean something more
definite than this.  We must not call any object of our loyalty a 'God'
without more ado, simply because to awaken our loyalty happens to be
one of God's functions.  He must have some intrinsic characteristics of
his own besides; and theism must mean the faith of that man who
believes that the object of _his_ loyalty has those other attributes,
negative or positive, as the case may be.

Now, as regards a great many of the attributes of God, and their
amounts and mutual relations, the world has been delivered over to
disputes.  All such may for our present purpose be considered as quite
inessential.  Not only such matters as his mode of revealing himself,
the precise extent of his providence and power and their connection
with our free-will, the proportion of his mercy to his justice, and the
amount of his responsibility for evil; but also his metaphysical
relation to the phenomenal world, whether causal, substantial, ideal,
or what not,--are affairs of purely sectarian opinion that need not
concern us at all.  Whoso debates them presupposes the essential
features of theism to be granted already; and it is with these
essential features, the bare poles of the subject, that our business
exclusively lies.

{122}