[13] Since this paper was written, President Cleveland has to a certain
extent met the need.  But who can doubt that if he had certain other
qualities which he has not yet shown, his influence would have been
still more decisive?  (1896.)

[14] That is, if a certain general character be rapidly repeated in our
outer experience with a number of strongly contrasted concomitants, it
will be sooner abstracted than if its associates are invariable or
monotonous.

[14] Principles of Psychology, i. 460.  See also pp. 463, 464, 500.  On
page 408 the law is formulated thus: The _persistence_ of the
connection in consciousness is proportionate to the _persistence_ of
the outer connection.  Mr. Spencer works most with the law of
frequency.  Either law, from my point of view, is false; but Mr.
Spencer ought not to think them synonymous.

[16] In his Principles of Science, chapters xi., xii., xxvi.

[17] Part viii. chap. iii.

{255}

THE IMPORTANCE OF INDIVIDUALS.

The previous Essay, on Great Men, etc., called forth two replies,--one
by Mr. Grant Allen, entitled the 'Genesis of Genius,' in the Atlantic
Monthly, vol. xlvii. p. 351; the other entitled 'Sociology and Hero
Worship,' by Mr. John Fiske, _ibidem_, p. 75.  The article which
follows is a rejoinder to Mr. Allen's article.  It was refused at the
time by the Atlantic, but saw the day later in the Open Court for
August, 1890.  It appears here as a natural supplement to the foregoing
article, on which it casts some explanatory light.

Mr. Allen's contempt for hero-worship is based on very simple
considerations.  A nation's great men, he says, are but slight
deviations from the general level.  The hero is merely a special
complex of the ordinary qualities of his race.  The petty differences
impressed upon ordinary Greek minds by Plato or Aristotle or Zeno, are
nothing at all compared with the vast differences between every Greek
mind and every Egyptian or Chinese mind.  We may neglect them in a
philosophy of history, just as in calculating the impetus of a
locomotive we neglect the extra impetus given by a single piece of
better coal.  What each man adds is but an infinitesimal fraction
compared with what he derives from his parents, or {256} indirectly
from his earlier ancestry.  And if what the past gives to the hero is
so much bulkier than what the future receives from him, it is what
really calls for philosophical treatment.  The problem for the
sociologist is as to what produces the average man; the extraordinary
men and what they produce may by the philosophers be taken for granted,
as too trivial variations to merit deep inquiry.