This writer then goes on to compare Sardinia and Sicily with some
detail.  All the material advantages are in favor of Sardinia, "and the
Sardinian population, being of an ancestry more mixed than that of the
English race, would justify far higher expectations than that of
Sicily."  Yet Sicily's past history has been brilliant in the extreme,
and her commerce to-day is great.  Dr. Gryzanowski has his own theory
of the historic torpor of these favored isles.  He thinks they
stagnated because they never gained political autonomy, being always
owned by some Continental power.  I will not dispute the theory; but I
will ask, Why did they not gain it? and answer immediately: Simply
because no individuals were {242} born there with patriotism and
ability enough to inflame their countrymen with national pride,
ambition, and thirst for independent life.  Corsicans and Sardinians
are probably as good stuff as any of their neighbors.  But the best
wood-pile will not blaze till a torch is applied, and the appropriate
torches seem to have been wanting.[12]

Sporadic great men come everywhere.  But for a community to get
vibrating through and through {243} with intensely active life, many
geniuses coming together and in rapid succession are required.  This is
why great epochs are so rare,--why the sudden bloom of a Greece, an
early Rome, a Renaissance, is such a mystery.  Blow must follow blow so
fast that no cooling can occur in the intervals.  Then the mass of the
nation grows incandescent, and may continue to glow by pure inertia
long after the originators of its internal movement have passed away.
We often hear surprise expressed that in these high tides of human
affairs not only the people should be filled with stronger life, but
that individual geniuses should seem so exceptionally abundant.  This
mystery is just about as deep as the time-honored conundrum as to why
great rivers flow by great towns.  It is true that great public
fermentations awaken and adopt many geniuses, who in more torpid times
would have had no chance to work.  But over and above this there must
be an exceptional concourse of genius about a time, to make the
fermentation begin at all.  The unlikeliness of the concourse is far
greater than the unlikeliness of any particular genius; hence the
rarity of these periods and the exceptional aspect which they always
wear.

{244}