Let us make this clear by a few examples.  The philosophy of evolution
offers us to-day a new criterion to serve as an ethical test between
right and wrong.  Previous criteria, it says, being subjective, have
left us still floundering in variations of opinion and the _status
belli_.  Here is a criterion which is objective and fixed: _That is to
be called good which is destined to prevail or survive_.  But we
immediately see that this standard can only remain objective by leaving
myself and my conduct out.  If what prevails and survives does so by my
help, and cannot do so without that help; if something else will
prevail in case I alter my conduct,--how can I possibly now, conscious
of alternative courses of action open before me, either of which {99} I
may suppose capable of altering the path of events, decide which course
to take by asking what path events will follow?  If they follow my
direction, evidently my direction cannot wait on them.  The only
possible manner in which an evolutionist can use his standard is the
obsequious method of forecasting the course society would take _but for
him_, and then putting an extinguisher on all personal idiosyncrasies
of desire and interest, and with bated breath and tiptoe tread
following as straight as may be at the tail, and bringing up the rear
of everything.  Some pious creatures may find a pleasure in this; but
not only does it violate our general wish to lead and not to follow (a
wish which is surely not immoral if we but lead aright), but if it be
treated as every ethical principle must be treated,--namely, as a rule
good for all men alike,--its general observance would lead to its
practical refutation by bringing about a general deadlock.  Each good
man hanging back and waiting for orders from the rest, absolute
stagnation would ensue.  Happy, then, if a few unrighteous ones
contribute an initiative which sets things moving again!

All this is no caricature.  That the course of destiny may be altered
by individuals no wise evolutionist ought to doubt.  Everything for him
has small beginnings, has a bud which may be 'nipped,' and nipped by a
feeble force.  Human races and tendencies follow the law, and have also
small beginnings.  The best, according to evolution, is that which has
the biggest endings.  Now, if a present race of men, enlightened in the
evolutionary philosophy, and able to forecast the future, were able to
discern in a tribe arising near them the potentiality of future
supremacy; were able to see that their own {100} race would eventually
be wiped out of existence by the new-comers if the expansion of these
were left unmolested,--these present sages would have two courses open
to them, either perfectly in harmony with the evolutionary test:
Strangle the new race now, and ours survives; help the new race, and it
survives.  In both cases the action is right as measured by the
evolutionary standard,--it is action for the winning side.