Now, at the very outset it seems rather odd that a philosopher who
pretends that the world is absolutely rational, or in other words that
it can be completely understood, should fall back on a principle (the
identity of contradictories) which utterly defies understanding, and
obliges him in fact to use the word 'understanding,' whenever it occurs
in his pages, as a term of contempt.  Take the case of space we used
above.  The common man who looks at space believes there is nothing in
it to be acquainted with beyond what he sees; no hidden machinery, no
secrets, nothing but the parts as they lie side by side and make the
static whole.  His intellect is satisfied with accepting space as an
ultimate genus of the given.  But Hegel cries to him: "Dupe! dost thou
not see it to be one nest of incompatibilities?  Do not the unity of
its wholeness and the diversity of its parts stand in patent
contradiction?  Does it not both unite and divide things; and but for
this strange and irreconcilable activity, would it be at all?  The
hidden dynamism of self-contradiction is what incessantly produces the
static appearance by which your sense is fooled."

But if the man ask how self-contradiction _can_ do all this, and how
its dynamism may be seen to work, Hegel can only reply by showing him
the space itself and saying: "Lo, _thus_."  In other words, instead of
the principle of explanation being more intelligible than the thing to
be explained, it is absolutely unintelligible if taken by itself, and
must appeal to its pretended product to prove its existence.  Surely,
such a system of explaining _notum per ignotum_, of {277} making the
_explicans_ borrow credentials from the _explicand_, and of creating
paradoxes and impossibilities where none were suspected, is a strange
candidate for the honor of being a complete rationalizer of the world.

The principle of the contradictoriness of identity and the identity of
contradictories is the essence of the hegelian system.  But what
probably washes this principle down most with beginners is the
combination in which its author works it with another principle which
is by no means characteristic of his system, and which, for want of a
better name, might be called the 'principle of totality.'  This
principle says that you cannot adequately know even a part until you
know of what whole it forms a part.  As Aristotle writes and Hegel
loves to quote, an amputated hand is not even a hand.  And as Tennyson
says,--

"Little flower--but if I could understand
  What you are, root and all, and all in all,
  I should know what God and man is."

Obviously, until we have taken in all the relations, immediate or
remote, into which the thing actually enters or potentially may enter,
we do not know all _about_ the thing.