It is far too little recognized how entirely the intellect is built up
of practical interests.  The theory of evolution is beginning to do
very good service by its reduction of all mentality to the type of
reflex action.  Cognition, in this view, is but a fleeting moment, a
cross-section at a certain point, of what in its totality is a motor
phenomenon.  In the lower forms of life no one will pretend that
cognition is anything more than a guide to appropriate action.  The
germinal question concerning things brought for the first time before
consciousness is not the theoretic 'What is that?' but the practical
'Who goes there?' or rather, as Horwicz has admirably put it, 'What is
to be done?'--'Was fang' ich an?'  In all our discussions about the
intelligence of lower animals, the only test we use is that of their
_acting_ as if for a purpose.  {85} Cognition, in short, is incomplete
until discharged in act; and although it is true that the later mental
development, which attains its maximum through the hypertrophied
cerebrum of man, gives birth to a vast amount of theoretic activity
over and above that which is immediately ministerial to practice, yet
the earlier claim is only postponed, not effaced, and the active nature
asserts its rights to the end.

When the cosmos in its totality is the object offered to consciousness,
the relation is in no whit altered.  React on it we must in some
congenial way.  It was a deep instinct in Schopenhauer which led him to
reinforce his pessimistic argumentation by a running volley of
invective against the practical man and his requirements.  No hope for
pessimism unless he is slain!

Helmholtz's immortal works on the eye and ear are to a great extent
little more than a commentary on the law that practical utility wholly
determines which parts of our sensations we shall be aware of, and
which parts we shall ignore.  We notice or discriminate an ingredient
of sense only so far as we depend upon it to modify our actions.  We
_comprehend_ a thing when we synthetize it by identity with another
thing.  But the other great department of our understanding,
_acquaintance_ (the two departments being recognized in all languages
by the antithesis of such words as _wissen_ and _kennen_; _scire_ and
_noscere_, etc.), what is that also but a synthesis,--a synthesis of a
passive perception with a certain tendency to reaction?  We are
acquainted with a thing as soon as we have learned how to behave
towards it, or how to meet the behavior which we expect from it.  Up to
that point it is still 'strange' to us.

{86}