Pre-Darwinian philosophers had also tried to establish the doctrine of
descent with modification; but they all committed the blunder of
clumping the two cycles of causation into one.  What preserves an
animal with his peculiarity, if it be a useful one, they saw to be the
nature of the environment to which the peculiarity was adjusted.  The
giraffe with his peculiar neck is preserved by the fact that there are
in his environment tall trees whose leaves he can digest.  But these
philosophers went further, and said that the presence of the trees not
only maintained an animal with a long neck to browse upon their
branches, but also produced him.  They _made_ his neck long by the
constant striving they aroused in him to reach up to them.  The
environment, in short, was supposed by these writers to mould the
animal by a kind of direct pressure, very much as a seal presses the
wax into harmony with itself.  Numerous instances were given of the way
in which this goes on under our eyes.  The exercise of the forge makes
the right arm strong, the palm grows callous to the oar, the mountain
air distends the chest, the chased fox grows cunning and the chased
bird shy, the arctic cold stimulates the animal combustion, and so
forth.  Now these changes, of which many more examples might be
adduced, are {223} at present distinguished by the special name of
_adaptive_ changes.  Their peculiarity is that that very feature in the
environment to which the animal's nature grows adjusted, itself
produces the adjustment.  The 'inner relation,' to use Mr. Spencer's
phrase, 'corresponds' with its own efficient cause.

Darwin's first achievement was to show the utter insignificance in
amount of these changes produced by direct adaptation, the immensely
greater mass of changes being produced by internal molecular accidents,
of which we know nothing.  His next achievement was to define the true
problem with which we have to deal when we study the effects of the
visible environment on the animal.  That problem is simply this; Is the
environment more likely to _preserve or to destroy him_, on account of
this or that peculiarity with which he may be born?  In giving the name
of 'accidental variations' to those peculiarities with which an animal
is born, Darwin does not for a moment mean to suggest that they are not
the fixed outcome of natural law.  If the total system of the universe
be taken into account, the causes of these variations and the visible
environment which preserves or destroys them, undoubtedly do, in some
remote and roundabout way, hang together.  What Darwin means is, that,
since that environment is a perfectly known thing, and its relations to
the organism in the way of destruction or preservation are tangible and
distinct, it would utterly confuse our finite understandings and
frustrate our hopes of science to mix in with it facts from such a
disparate and incommensurable cycle as that in which the variations are
produced.  This last cycle is that of occurrences before the animal is
born.  It is the cycle of influences upon ova and embryos; {224} in
which lie the causes that tip them and tilt them towards masculinity or
femininity, towards strength or weakness, towards health or disease,
and towards divergence from the parent type.  What are the causes there?