Now turn from this to the life of man.  In the dog's life we see the
world invisible to him because we live in both worlds.  In human life,
although we only see our world, and his within it, yet encompassing
both these worlds a still wider world may be there, as unseen by us as
our world is by him; and to believe in that world _may_ be the most
essential function that our lives in this world have to perform.  But
"_may_ be! _may_ be!" one now hears the positivist contemptuously
exclaim; "what use can a scientific life have for maybes?"  Well, I
reply, the {59} 'scientific' life itself has much to do with maybes,
and human life at large has everything to do with them.  So far as man
stands for anything, and is productive or originative at all, his
entire vital function may be said to have to deal with maybes.  Not a
victory is gained, not a deed of faithfulness or courage is done,
except upon a maybe; not a service, not a sally of generosity, not a
scientific exploration or experiment or text-book, that may not be a
mistake.  It is only by risking our persons from one hour to another
that we live at all.  And often enough our faith beforehand in an
uncertified result _is the only thing that makes the result come true_.
Suppose, for instance, that you are climbing a mountain, and have
worked yourself into a position from which the only escape is by a
terrible leap.  Have faith that you can successfully make it, and your
feet are nerved to its accomplishment.  But mistrust yourself, and
think of all the sweet things you have heard the scientists say of
maybes, and you will hesitate so long that, at last, all unstrung and
trembling, and launching yourself in a moment of despair, you roll in
the abyss.  In such a case (and it belongs to an enormous class), the
part of wisdom as well as of courage is to _believe what is in the line
of your needs_, for only by such belief is the need fulfilled.  Refuse
to believe, and you shall indeed be right, for you shall irretrievably
perish.  But believe, and again you shall be right, for you shall save
yourself.  You make one or the other of two possible universes true by
your trust or mistrust,--both universes having been only _maybes_, in
this particular, before you contributed your act.

Now, it appears to me that the question whether life is worth living is
subject to conditions logically {60} much like these.  It does, indeed,
depend on you _the liver_.  If you surrender to the nightmare view and
crown the evil edifice by your own suicide, you have indeed made a
picture totally black.  Pessimism, completed by your act, is true
beyond a doubt, so far as your world goes.  Your mistrust of life has
removed whatever worth your own enduring existence might have given to
it; and now, throughout the whole sphere of possible influence of that
existence, the mistrust has proved itself to have had divining power.
But suppose, on the other hand, that instead of giving way to the
nightmare view you cling to it that this world is not the _ultimatum_.
Suppose you find yourself a very well-spring, as Wordsworth says, of--

"Zeal, and the virtue to exist by faith
  As soldiers live by courage; as, by strength
  Of heart, the sailor fights with roaring seas."