This leads me to animadvert on an erroneous inference which hegelian
idealism makes from the form of the negative judgment.  Every negation,
it says, must be an intellectual act.  Even the most _naïf_ realism
will hardly pretend that the non-table as such exists _in se_ after the
same fashion as the table does.  But table and non-table, since they
are given to our thought together, must be consubstantial.  Try to make
the position or affirmation of the table as simple as you can, it is
also the negation of the non-table; and thus positive being itself
seems after all but a function of intelligence, like negation.
Idealism is proved, realism is unthinkable.  Now I have not myself the
least objection to idealism,--an hypothesis which voluminous
considerations make plausible, and whose difficulties may be cleared
away any day by new discriminations or discoveries.  But I object to
proving by these patent ready-made _à priori_ methods that which can
only be the fruit of a wide and patient induction.  For the truth is
that our affirmations and negations do not stand on the same footing at
all, and are anything but consubstantial.  An affirmation says
something about an objective existence.  A negation says something
_about an affirmation_,--namely, that it is false.  There are no
negative predicates or falsities in nature.  Being makes no false
hypotheses that have {291} to be contradicted.  The only denials she
can be in any way construed to perform are denials of our errors.  This
shows plainly enough that denial must be of something mental, since the
thing denied is always a fiction.  "The table is not the chair"
supposes the speaker to have been playing with the false notion that it
may have been the chair.  But affirmation may perfectly well be of
something having no such necessary and constitutive relation to
thought.  Whether it really is of such a thing is for harder
considerations to decide.

If idealism be true, the great question that presents itself is whether
its truth involve the necessity of an infinite, unitary, and omniscient
consciousness, or whether a republic of semi-detached consciousnesses
will do,--consciousnesses united by a certain common fund of
representations, but each possessing a private store which the others
do not share.  Either hypothesis is to me conceivable.  But whether the
egos be one or many, the _nextness_ of representations to one another
within them is the principle of unification of the universe.  To be
thus consciously next to some other representation is the condition to
which each representation must submit, under penalty of being excluded
from this universe, and like Lord Dundreary's bird 'flocking all
alone,' and forming a separate universe by itself.  But this is only a
condition of which the representations _partake_; it leaves all their
other determinations undecided.  To say, because representation _b_
cannot be in the same universe with _a_ without being _a's neighbor_;
that therefore _a_ possesses, involves, or necessitates _b_, hide and
hair, flesh and fell, all appurtenances and belongings,--is {292} only
the silly hegelian all-or-nothing insatiateness once more.