Thus the evolutionist foundation of ethics is purely objective only to
the herd of nullities whose votes count for zero in the march of
events.  But for others, leaders of opinion or potentates, and in
general those to whose actions position or genius gives a far-reaching
import, and to the rest of us, each in his measure,--whenever we
espouse a cause we contribute to the determination of the evolutionary
standard of right.  The truly wise disciple of this school will then
admit faith as an ultimate ethical factor.  Any philosophy which makes
such questions as, What is the ideal type of humanity?  What shall be
reckoned virtues?  What conduct is good? depend on the question, What
is going to succeed?--must needs fall back on personal belief as one of
the ultimate conditions of the truth.  For again and again success
depends on energy of act; energy again depends on faith that we shall
not fail; and that faith in turn on the faith that we are right,--which
faith thus verifies itself.

Take as an example the question of optimism or pessimism, which makes
so much noise just now in Germany.  Every human being must sometime
decide for himself whether life is worth living.  Suppose that in
looking at the world and seeing how full it is of misery, of old age,
of wickedness and {101} pain, and how unsafe is his own future, he
yields to the pessimistic conclusion, cultivates disgust and dread,
ceases striving, and finally commits suicide.  He thus adds to the mass
_M_ of mundane phenomena, independent of his subjectivity, the
subjective complement _x_, which makes of the whole an utterly black
picture illumined by no gleam of good.  Pessimism completed, verified
by his moral reaction and the deed in which this ends, is true beyond a
doubt.  _M_ + _x_ expresses a state of things totally bad.  The man's
belief supplied all that was lacking to make it so, and now that it is
made so the belief was right.

But now suppose that with the same evil facts _M_, the man's reaction
_x_ is exactly reversed; suppose that instead of giving way to the evil
he braves it, and finds a sterner, more wonderful joy than any passive
pleasure can yield in triumphing over pain and defying fear; suppose he
does this successfully, and however thickly evils crowd upon him proves
his dauntless subjectivity to be more than their match,--will not every
one confess that the bad character of the _M_ is here the _conditio
sine qua non_ of the good character of the _x_?  Will not every one
instantly declare a world fitted only for fair-weather human beings
susceptible of every passive enjoyment, but without independence,
courage, or fortitude, to be from a moral point of view incommensurably
inferior to a world framed to elicit from the man every form of
triumphant endurance and conquering moral energy?  As James Hinton
says,--