"'All the sublime prerogatives of Man;
   The storied memories of the times of old,
  The patient tracking of the world's great plan
   Through sequences and changes myriadfold.

"'This chance was never offered me before;
   For me the infinite past is blank and dumb;
  This chance recurreth never, nevermore;
   Blank, blank for me the infinite To-come.

"'And this sole chance was frustrate from my birth,
   A mockery, a delusion; and my breath
  Of noble human life upon this earth
   So racks me that I sigh for senseless death.

"'My wine of life is poison mixed with gall,
   My noonday passes in a nightmare dream,
  I worse than lose the years which are my all:
   What can console me for the loss supreme?

"'Speak not of comfort where no comfort is,
   Speak not at all: can words make foul things fair!
  Our life 's a cheat, our death a black abyss:
   Hush, and be mute, envisaging despair.'

"This vehement voice came from the northern aisle,
   Rapid and shrill to its abrupt harsh close;
  And none gave answer for a certain while,
   For words must shrink from these most wordless woes;
  At last the pulpit speaker simply said,
  With humid eyes and thoughtful, drooping head,--

{37}

"'My Brother, my poor Brothers, it is thus:
  This life holds nothing good for us,
   But it ends soon and nevermore can be;
  And we knew nothing of it ere our birth,
  And shall know nothing when consigned to earth;
   I ponder these thoughts, and they comfort me.'"

"It ends soon, and never more can be," "Lo, you are free to end it when
you will,"--these verses flow truthfully from the melancholy Thomson's
pen, and are in truth a consolation for all to whom, as to him, the
world is far more like a steady den of fear than a continual fountain
of delight.  That life is not worth living the whole army of suicides
declare,--an army whose roll-call, like the famous evening gun of the
British army, follows the sun round the world and never terminates.
We, too, as we sit here in our comfort, must 'ponder these things'
also, for we are of one substance with these suicides, and their life
is the life we share.  The plainest intellectual integrity,--nay, more,
the simplest manliness and honor, forbid us to forget their case.

"If suddenly," says Mr. Ruskin, "in the midst of the enjoyments of the
palate and lightnesses of heart of a London dinner-party, the walls of
the chamber were parted, and through their gap the nearest human beings
who were famishing and in misery were borne into the midst of the
company feasting and fancy free; if, pale from death, horrible in
destitution, broken by despair, body by body they were laid upon the
soft carpet, one beside the chair of every guest,--would only the
crumbs of the dainties be cast to them; would only a passing glance, a
passing thought, be vouchsafed to them?  Yet the actual facts, the real
relation of each Dives and Lazarus, are not altered by the {38}
intervention of the house-wall between the table and the sick-bed,--by
the few feet of ground (how few!) which are, indeed, all that separate
the merriment from the misery."

II.