In the first place, they are molecular and invisible,--inaccessible,
therefore, to direct observation of any kind.  Secondly, their
operations are compatible with any social, political, and physical
conditions of environment.  The same parents, living in the same
environing conditions, may at one birth produce a genius, at the next
an idiot or a monster.  The visible external conditions are therefore
not direct determinants of this cycle; and the more we consider the
matter, the more we are forced to believe that two children of the same
parents are made to differ from each other by causes as
disproportionate to their ultimate effects as is the famous pebble on
the Rocky Mountain crest, which separates two rain-drops, to the Gulf
of St. Lawrence and the Pacific Ocean toward which it makes them
severally flow.

The great mechanical distinction between transitive forces and
discharging forces is nowhere illustrated on such a scale as in
physiology.  Almost all causes there are forces of _detent_, which
operate by simply unlocking energy already stored up.  They are
upsetters of unstable equilibria, and the resultant effect depends
infinitely more on the nature of the materials upset than on that of
the particular stimulus which joggles them down.  Galvanic work, equal
to unity, done on a frog's nerve will discharge from the muscle to
which the nerve belongs mechanical work equal to seventy thousand; and
exactly the same muscular {225} effect will emerge if other irritants
than galvanism are employed.  The irritant has merely started or
provoked something which then went on of itself,--as a match may start
a fire which consumes a whole town.  And qualitatively as well as
quantitatively the effect may be absolutely incommensurable with the
cause.  We find this condition of things in ail organic matter.
Chemists are distracted by the difficulties which the instability of
albuminoid compounds opposes to their study.  Two specimens, treated in
what outwardly seem scrupulously identical conditions, behave in quite
different ways.  You know about the invisible factors of fermentation,
and how the fate of a jar of milk--whether it turn into a sour clot or
a mass of koumiss--depends on whether the lactic acid ferment or the
alcoholic is introduced first, and gets ahead of the other in starting
the process.  Now, when the result is the tendency of an ovum, itself
invisible to the naked eye, to tip towards this direction or that in
its further evolution,--to bring forth a genius or a dunce, even as the
rain-drop passes east or west of the pebble,--is it not obvious that
the deflecting cause must lie in a region so recondite and minute, must
be such a ferment of a ferment, an infinitesimal of so high an order,
that surmise itself may never succeed even in attempting to frame an
image of it?

Such being the case, was not Darwin right to turn his back upon that
region altogether, and to keep his own problem carefully free from all
entanglement with matters such as these?  The success of his work is a
sufficiently affirmative reply.