And can we not ourselves sympathize with his mood in some degree?  The
old receipts of squeezing the thistle and taking the bull by the horns
have many applications.  An evil frankly accepted loses half its sting
and all its terror.  The Stoics had their cheap and easy way of dealing
with evil.  _Call_ your woes goods, they said; refuse to _call_ your
lost blessings by that name,--and you are happy.  So of the
unintelligibilities: call them means of intelligibility, and what
further do you require?  There is even a more legitimate excuse than
that.  In the exceedingness of the facts of life over our formulas lies
a standing temptation at certain times to give up trying to say
anything adequate about them, and to take refuge in wild and whirling
words which but confess our impotence before their ineffability.  Thus
Baron Bunsen writes to his wife: "Nothing is near but the far; nothing
true but the highest; nothing credible but the inconceivable; nothing
so real as the impossible; nothing clear but the deepest; nothing so
visible as the invisible; and no life is there but through death."  Of
these ecstatic moments the _credo quia impossibile_ is the classical
expression.  Hegel's originality lies in his making their mood
permanent and sacramental, and authorized to supersede all others,--not
as a mystical bath and refuge for feeling when tired reason sickens of
her intellectual responsibilities (thank Heaven! that bath is always
ready), but as the very form of intellectual responsibility itself.

{275}

And now after this long introduction, let me trace some of Hegel's ways
of applying his discovery.  His system resembles a mouse-trap, in which
if you once pass the door you may be lost forever.  Safety lies in not
entering.  Hegelians have anointed, so to speak, the entrance with
various considerations which, stated in an abstract form, are so
plausible as to slide us unresistingly and almost unwittingly through
the fatal arch.  It is not necessary to drink the ocean to know that it
is salt; nor need a critic dissect a whole system after proving that
its premises are rotten.  I shall accordingly confine myself to a few
of the points that captivate beginners most; and assume that if they
break down, so must the system which they prop.

First of all, Hegel has to do utterly away with the sharing and
partaking business he so much loathes.  He will not call contradiction
the glue in one place and identity in another; that is too
half-hearted.  Contradiction must be a glue universal, and must derive
its credit from being shown to be latently involved in cases that we
hitherto supposed to embody pure continuity.  Thus, the relations of an
ego with its objects, of one time with another time, of one place with
another place, of a cause with its effect, of a thing with its
properties, and especially of parts with wholes, must be shown to
involve contradiction.  Contradiction, shown to lurk in the very heart
of coherence and continuity, cannot after that be held to defeat them,
and must be taken as the universal solvent,--or, rather, there is no
longer any need of a solvent.  To 'dissolve' things in identity was the
dream of earlier cruder schools.  Hegel will show that their very
difference is their identity, and that {276} in the act of detachment
the detachment is undone, and they fall into each other's arms.