Can it be believed in the teeth of these elementary truths that the
principle _determinatio negatio_ is held throughout Hegel to imply an
active contradiction, conflict, and exclusion?  Do the horse-cars
jingling outside negate me writing in this room?  Do I, reader, negate
you?  Of course, if I say, "Reader, we are two, and therefore I am
two," I negate you, for I am actually thrusting a part into the seat of
the whole.  {289} The orthodox logic expresses the fallacy by saying
the we is taken by me distributively instead of collectively; but as
long as I do not make this blunder, and am content with my part, we all
are safe.  In _rerum naturâ_, parts remain parts.  Can you imagine one
position in space trying to get into the place of another position and
having to be 'contradicted' by that other?  Can you imagine your
thought of an object trying to dispossess the real object from its
being, and so being negated by it?  The great, the sacred law of
partaking, the noiseless step of continuity, seems something that Hegel
cannot possibly understand.  All or nothing is his one idea.  For him
each point of space, of time, each feeling in the ego, each quality of
being, is clamoring, "I am the all,--there is nought else but me."
This clamor is its essence, which has to be negated in another act
which gives it its true determination.  What there is of affirmative in
this determination is thus the mere residuum left from the negation by
others of the negation it originally applied to them.

But why talk of residuum?  The Kilkenny cats of fable could leave a
residuum in the shape of their undevoured tails.  But the Kilkenny cats
of existence as it appears in the pages of Hegel are all-devouring, and
leave no residuum.  Such is the unexampled fury of their onslaught that
they get clean out of themselves and into each other, nay more, pass
right through each other, and then "return into themselves" ready for
another round, as insatiate, but as inconclusive, as the one that went
before.

If I characterized Hegel's own mood as _hubris_, the insolence of
excess, what shall I say of the mood he ascribes to being?  Man makes
the gods in his {290} image; and Hegel, in daring to insult the
spotless _sôphrosune_ of space and time, the bound-respecters, in
branding as strife that law of sharing under whose sacred keeping, like
a strain of music, like an odor of incense (as Emerson says), the dance
of the atoms goes forward still, seems to me but to manifest his own
deformity.