But if this be so, is it not clear that the facts _M_, taken _per se_,
are inadequate to justify a conclusion either way in advance of my
action?  My action is the complement which, by proving congruous or
not, reveals the latent nature of the mass to which it is applied.  The
world may in fact be likened unto a lock, whose inward nature, moral or
unmoral, will never reveal itself to our simply expectant gaze.  The
positivists, forbidding us to make any assumptions regarding it,
condemn us to eternal ignorance, for the 'evidence' which they wait for
can never come so long as we are passive.  But nature has put into our
hands two keys, by which we may test the lock.  If we try the moral key
_and it fits_, it is a moral lock.  If we try the unmoral key and _it_
fits, it is an unmoral lock.  I cannot possibly conceive of any other
sort of 'evidence' or 'proof' than this.  It is quite true that the
co-operation of generations is needed to educe it.  But in these
matters the solidarity (so called) of the human race is a patent fact.
The essential thing to notice is that our active preference is a
legitimate part of the game,--that it is our plain business as men to
try one of the keys, and the one in which we most confide.  If then the
proof exist not till I have acted, and I must needs in acting run the
risk of being wrong, how can the popular science professors be right in
objurgating in me as infamous a 'credulity' which the strict logic of
the situation requires?  If this really be a moral universe; if by my
acts I be a factor of its destinies; if to believe where I may doubt be
itself a moral act {109} analogous to voting for a side not yet sure to
win,--by what right shall they close in upon me and steadily negate the
deepest conceivable function of my being by their preposterous command
that I shall stir neither hand nor foot, but remain balancing myself in
eternal and insoluble doubt?  Why, doubt itself is a decision of the
widest practical reach, if only because we may miss by doubting what
goods we might be gaining by espousing the winning side.  But more than
that! it is often practically impossible to distinguish doubt from
dogmatic negation.  If I refuse to stop a murder because I am in doubt
whether it be not justifiable homicide, I am virtually abetting the
crime.  If I refuse to bale out a boat because I am in doubt whether my
efforts will keep her afloat, I am really helping to sink her.  If in
the mountain precipice I doubt my right to risk a leap, I actively
connive at my destruction.  He who commands himself not to be credulous
of God, of duty, of freedom, of immortality, may again and again be
indistinguishable from him who dogmatically denies them.  Scepticism in
moral matters is an active ally of immorality.  Who is not for is
against.  The universe will have no neutrals in these questions.  In
theory as in practice, dodge or hedge, or talk as we like about a wise
scepticism, we are really doing volunteer military service for one side
or the other.