Consider, for example, space.  It is a unit.  No force can in any way
break, wound, or tear it.  It has no joints between which you can pass
your amputating knife, for it penetrates the knife and is not split,
Try to make a hole in space by annihilating an inch of it.  To make a
hole you must drive something else through.  But what can you drive
through space except what is itself spatial?

But notwithstanding it is this very paragon of unity, space in its
parts contains an infinite variety, and the unity and the variety do
not contradict each other, for they obtain in different respects.  The
one is the whole, the many are the parts.  Each part is one again, but
only one fraction; and part lies beside part in absolute nextness, the
very picture of peace and non-contradiction.  It is true that the space
between two points both unites and divides them, just as the bar of a
dumb-bell both unites and divides the two balls.  But the union and the
division are not _secundum idem_: it divides them by keeping them out
of the space between, it unites them by keeping them out of the space
beyond; so the double function presents no inconsistency.
Self-contradiction in space could only ensue if one part tried to oust
another from its position; but the notion of such an absurdity vanishes
in the framing, and cannot stay to vex the mind.[2]  Beyond the parts
we see or think at any {266} given time extend further parts; but the
beyond is homogeneous with what is embraced, and follows the same law;
so that no surprises, no foreignness, can ever emerge from space's womb.

Thus with space our intelligence is absolutely intimate; it is
rationality and transparency incarnate.  The same may be said of the
ego and of time.  But if for simplicity's sake we ignore them, we may
truly say that when we desiderate rational knowledge of the world the
standard set by our knowledge of space is what governs our desire.[3]
Cannot the breaks, the jolts, the margin of foreignness, be exorcised
from other things and leave them unitary like the space they fill?
Could this be done, the philosophic kingdom of heaven would be at hand.

But the moment we turn to the material qualities {267} of being, we
find the continuity ruptured on every side.  A fearful jolting begins.
Even if we simplify the world by reducing it to its mechanical bare
poles,--atoms and their motions,--the discontinuity is bad enough.  The
laws of clash, the effects of distance upon attraction and repulsion,
all seem arbitrary collocations of data.  The atoms themselves are so
many independent facts, the existence of any one of which in no wise
seems to involve the existence of the rest.  We have not banished
discontinuity, we have only made it finer-grained.  And to get even
that degree of rationality into the universe we have had to butcher a
great part of its contents.  The secondary qualities we stripped off
from the reality and swept into the dust-bin labelled 'subjective
illusion,' still _as such_ are facts, and must themselves be
rationalized in some way.